=== page 1 ===
abinvasives.ca
info@abinvasives.ca
Feral Rabbits
Oryctolagus cuniculus (aka European rabbit)
Overview: 
Feral rabbits are native to Europe 
and northwestern Africa but have  
been introduced to every continent 
except Antarctica .1 They were first 
introduced to North America in the 
18th century by European settlers 
bringing them as food and fur. Now 
they can be found in the wild from 
introduction by pet owners who can no 
longer care for them. Their 
presence can be very harmful to 
environments. Many native species 
in the Leporidae  family can be 
mistaken for feral rabbits, like 
mountain cottontails, snowshoe hares,
 
and white-tailed jackrabbits. 
Rabbits can spread and reproduce 
rapidly as females, known as does, 
can have up to 3 litters each year 
and begin breeding as young as 3 
months old. 1,2 A single litter 
can consist of 4-12 kits (baby rabbits), 
with an average litter size of 5. 
Rapid reproduction is a significant 
factor in the population explosion 
of feral rabbits. Feral rabbits can live 
up to 10 years in captivity, but many 
only live about 12-15 months in the 
wild. Due to outdoor conditions, 
released rabbit populations deal 
with diseases, predators, malnutrition, 
and extreme weather . While many 
survive long enough to reproduce, they 
live a much shorter and more 
dangerous life in the wild than if 
they had been kept as pets.
Distribution: 
Feral rabbits have been reported 
across Alberta in both urban and rural 
environments.
Habitat:
Thrive in urban areas, parks, farmlands, 
and grasslands. They prefer areas with 
thick cover to hide in and soft ground 
to create shallow burrows for shelter 
but are highly adaptable.
Identification:
Feral rabbits come in a variety of 
colours from white, black, brown to a 
combination and do not change colour 
with the seasons. Typically have a 
beige ring around the eyes. Ears are 
smaller and legs are shorter than hares. 
Usually weigh between 2-5 lbs 
and measure 35-50 cm in length. 
Economic Impact:
Overgrazing can become an issue in 
areas where feral rabbits are present. 
This can impact agriculture from crop 
revenue losses, as well as urban 
gardens and landscaping 
maintenance costs from rabbits 
gnawing on trees and shrubs and 
stripping bark. Due to their high rate of 
reproduction, once they have been 
established it is very hard to control 
rabbit populations, and control 
methods require large amounts of time 
and money to achieve . The Town of 
Canmore spent up to $50,000 per year 
hiring contractors to trap and 
euthanize feral rabbits.5
Environmental Impact:
Feral rabbits can have a detrimental 
impact on native flora by overgrazing, 
leading to soil erosion and  biodiversity 
loss. They gnaw on the bark of woody 
plants in the winter when no green 
growth is available and can do 
significant damage by girdling young 
stems or nipping off all the buds and 
shoots. Their burrowing can cause 
land degradation and erosion. These 
adaptable herbivores have become 
Nicki Perdue, City of Calgary Rebekah D. Wallace, University of Geogia, Bugwood.org
Last Updated: April 2024
ALBERTA REGULATION: 
Not Regulated

=== page 2 ===
abinvasives.ca
info@abinvasives.ca
Feral Rabbits (continued)
Prevention:
Don’t Let It Loose! The best way to 
prevent further spread of feral rabbits 
is to spread awareness about the 
dangers of releasing pets into the wild. 
Releasing a pet of any kind into the 
wild is illegal in Alberta and can be 
subject to a fine. Report feral rabbit 
sightings and issues to your 
municipality or on EDDMapS.   
Areas can also be modified to 
discourage and exclude rabbits. 4 By 
removing unnecessary undergrowth, a 
key area for shelter, it will discourage 
rabbits from  moving in. Mechanical 
barriers 
are most effective at 
protecting vegetation. Mesh fences 
should be at least 1m high for 
vegetation, and 1m above the 
potential snow line for  protecting trees 
or shrubs. Fences should also be set 
7-10 cm into the ground to prevent
rabbits from digging underneath.
Hardware cloth can make a good
barrier as well and should follow the
same guidelines. Avoid placing any
barriers directly against vegetation as
rabbits can reach through the holes to
feed.
Control:
Native rabbits and hares can be 
hunted at any time of year in 
appropriate hunting areas of Alberta 
without a license. 4 It is illegal to poison 
rabbits or use leg-hold traps to catch 
rabbits in Alberta. Live trapping can be 
used to remove rabbits from an area 
but must be done humanely. Wooden 
box traps work well and should be 
placed in areas sheltered from the 
weather and should be checked 
regularly (at least once per 24 hours if 
food and water are provided in the 
trap). Repellents can be used to make 
plants distasteful to rabbits with varied 
success depending on how much 
competition there is for food in your 
area. Animals and humans cannot 
consume repellent-treated plants. Two 
chemical repellents are registered for 
use in Alberta, both sold under the 
name SKOOT.4 
invasive in the local ecosystem, 
outcompeting native herbivores for 
food resources and altering vegetation 
dynamics. Their prolific breeding 
exacerbates the problem, leading to 
overgrazing of plant species. This 
disruption can result in the loss of 
biodiversity, affecting not only plants 
but also the insects and animals 
dependent on them. Their large 
numbers often support increased 
populations of predators that can then 
harm native prey species, and they 
experience higher than normal 
predation. 
Sociological Impacts:
Feral rabbits can carry diseases such 
as tularemia and myxomatosis, which 
may pose a risk to other wildlife and 
domestic pets. Alberta populations 
have been dealing with outbreaks of 
rabbit haemorrhagic disease 3, a highly 
lethal and infectious virus that could 
begin to spread to native rabbit and 
hare species. If you see a potentially 
diseased rabbit, please report it to 
your local veterinarian or the 
Goverment of Alberta Wildlife Disease 
Unit.
REFERENCES:
1. Tislerics, A. Oryctolagus cuniculus European rabbit. Animal Diversity Web. University of Michigan Museum of Zoology. https://animaldiversity.org/
accounts/Oryctolagus_cuniculus/. Accessed: November 2023
2. Oryctolagus cuniculus. Global Invasive Species Database.  http://www.iucngisd.org/gisd/speciesname/Oryctolagus+cuniculus. Accessed: November
2023.
3. Alberta Environment and Parks. 2022. Rabbit Haemorrhagic Disease. Accessed November 2023 from: https://open.alberta.ca/dataset/c990a9c2-
cc7a-4471-aa4b-ce73dd1f8f7f/resource/3af774d2-ae6c-4256-8953-b0717dac20c0/download/aep-rabbit-haemorrhagic-disease-2022-fall.pdf
4. Alberta Agriculture Food and Rural Development. Revised 2005. Control of Rabbits and Hares. Accessed online November 2023 from: https://
open.alberta.ca/dataset/4f68df26-b8d7-4c57-91c5-092f4a28bd90/resource/a8b92fbe-78b4-46db-882b-3aca1aa98a37/download/2005-684-12.pdf
5. CBC News Calgary. 2023. Accessed online April 25, 2024 from: https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/canmore-feral-rabbits-rhd-rabbit-hemorrhagic-
disease-1.7054595
Nicki Perdue, City of Calgary
