=== page 1 ===
 
For Immediate Release   
Neighborhood Attractants and Lynx 
September 23, 2021— An adult female lynx was killed under Defense of Life or Property (DLP) 
circumstances in early September by a south Anchorage homeowner, after the animal was believed to 
have killed and injured multiple ducks and chickens. The DLP situation was reported to the Alaska 
Department of Fish & Game (ADF&G), meeting the legal requirements for killing an animal under these 
regulations.  
Following this incident, four lynx kittens were seen nearby without an adult and reported on social 
media over the following days. ADF&G received multiple reports of the kittens moving between homes 
and running across streets. Sadly, one of the kittens was killed by a car on a nearby roadway, resulting in 
the decision to capture the remaining kittens for evaluation. With the assistance of local homeowners 
who had been observing the kittens, ADF&G staff were able to capture the kittens on Tuesday.  
Examination of the three lynx kittens indicated they were in poor body condition, which is difficult to 
determine from a distance on animals with thick fur like lynx. While the kittens had been seen chasing 
feral domestic rabbits, they were not old enough to thrive in the wild on their own. Feral domestic 
rabbits, which are regularly seen in the area, are classified as deleterious exotic wildlife and are illegal to 
feed either negligently or intentionally under state law.  
ADF&G makes efforts to place orphaned animals with permanent placement wildlife facilities whenever 
possible; however, placement options are very limited. Furthermore, due to disease transmission 
concerns and under the recommendations of ADF&G veterinarians, the lynx were only approved for 
permanent placement within Anchorage and could not be transferred to an out-of-state facility at a later 
date. Department staff contacted a facility that had expressed interest in lynx but they were unable to 
take them. The kittens were later euthanized. 
“This is a sad situation for everyone involved. The best place for young wild animals to grow up is in the 
wild under the care of their mothers. Euthanizing an animal is not a decision any of us take lightly, and 
the circumstances leading to this situation were very unfortunate,” said Regional Supervisor Cyndi 
Wardlow. 
Minimizing the availability of attractants (i.e. poultry, livestock, etc.) around homes reduces the 
likelihood of potentially dangerous human-wildlife interactions, loss of personal property, and the 
unnecessary destruction of wildlife, including lynx. Homeowners who keep poultry, livestock and other 
domestic animals outside their homes, should invest in their perimeter and electric fences to further 

=== page 2 ===
reduce their availability to wild animals. For more information on electric fences, contact your area 
department office or visit the department webpage at:    
https://www.adfg.alaska.gov/index.cfm?adfg=livingwithbears.bearfences. 
Young animals alone for more than 48 hours should be reported to the nearest ADF&G office during 
regular business hours, or by filing a report online at http://www.adfg.alaska.gov and clicking the 
"Report a Wildlife Encounter" button. For immediate public safety concerns, please call 9-1-1. 
 
For more information, visit www.adfg.alaska.gov/index.cfm?adfg=distressedwildlife.mammals. 
 
### 
 
 
Media Contact: Jeff Selinger, (907) 260-2905, jeff.selinger@alaska.gov  
