White-winged Dove | Audubon Field Guide 
 Skip to main content 
 More from Audubon 
 Shop Audubon 
 Magazine 
 Menu 
 Audubon 
 Our Work 
 Protecting Bird Habitats 
 Coasts and Oceans 
 Rivers, Lakes, and Wetlands 
 Grasslands, Aridlands, and Forests 
 Boreal Forest of Canada 
 Cities, Towns, and Parks 
 Latin America and the Caribbean 
 Bending the Bird Curve 
 Climate Solutions 
 Our Climate Strategy 
 Birds and Clean Energy 
 Natural Climate Solutions 
 Restoration and Resiliency 
 Policy and Advocacy 
 Policy Leadership 
 Climate Policy and Renewable Energy 
 Our Science in Action 
 Audubon Science 
 Migratory Bird Initiative 
 Birds and Climate Change 
 Important Bird Areas 
 Latest News 
 Bird and Conservation News 
 Press Room 
 Why Birds? 
 About Us 
 Who We Are 
 Our Mission 
 Our History 
 Equity, Diversity, Inclusion & Belonging 
 Leadership & Board of Directors 
 Reports & Financials 
 Find Audubon Near You 
 Work With Us 
 Where We Work 
 States 
 Alaska 
 Arizona 
 Arkansas 
 California 
 Colorado 
 Connecticut 
 Florida 
 Illinois 
 Indiana 
 Iowa 
 Louisiana 
 Maine 
 Maryland 
 Michigan 
 Minnesota 
 Mississippi 
 Missouri 
 Nebraska 
 New Mexico 
 New York 
 North Carolina 
 North Dakota 
 Ohio 
 Pennsylvania 
 South Carolina 
 South Dakota 
 Texas 
 Utah 
 Vermont 
 Washington 
 Wisconsin 
 Wyoming 
 Americas 
 Belize 
 Bolivia 
 Canada 
 Chile 
 Colombia 
 Ecuador 
 Mexico 
 Panama 
 Peru 
 The Bahamas 
 Explore Birds 
 Bird Search & ID 
 Visit Our Guide To North American Birds 
 Download the Audubon Bird Guide App 
 Get Into Birding 
 Birding Hub 
 How to Get Started 
 Tips For Identifying Birds 
 Birding Advice and Stories 
 Frequently Asked Bird Questions 
 Birding at Home 
 Bird Feeding and Care 
 Search for Native Plants 
 Audubon Birdseed, Houses, and More 
 Gear Guides 
 Gear and Resources 
 Binocular Guide 
 Spotting Scope Guide 
 Photography 
 Bird Photography Hub 
 Tips for Photographing Birds 
 Camera and Equipment Advice 
 Audubon Photography Awards 
 Avian Art 
 The Aviary 
 The Audubon Mural Project 
 John James Audubon's Birds of America 
 The Sketch by Jason Polan 
 The Birdsong Project 
 Search for Birds in Your Area 
 Get Involved 
 Take Action 
 Action Center 
 Speak Up for Wetlands and Streams 
 Ask Congress to Restore Habitat on Public Lands 
 Urge Congress to Advance a Conservation-Forward Farm Bill 
 Audubon Near You 
 Audubon Near You 
 Events 
 Audubon on Campus 
 Visit an Audubon Center 
 Community Science 
 Community Science at Audubon 
 Christmas Bird Count 
 Climate Watch 
 Great Backyard Bird Count 
 For Kids 
 Audubon for Kids 
 Audubon Adventures 
 Ways to Get Involved 
 Membership & Giving 
 Membership 
 Become a Member 
 Renew Your Membership 
 Gift a Membership 
 Donate 
 Donate 
 Great Egret Society 
 The Canopy 
 In Memorial Gifts 
 In Honor Gifts 
 Matching Gifts 
 Giving Other Assets 
 Gifts of Appreciated Stock 
 IRA Charitable Gifts 
 Real Estate Gifts 
 Legacy Gifts 
 Donor Advised Funds 
 Shop 
 Audubon Marketplace 
 Birdhouses and Feeders 
 Bird Seed 
 Calendars 
 Puzzles, Games and DIY Kits 
 More Ways to Give 
 Near me 
 Search 
 Search Audubon 
 Recent
 Popular Search
 Ways to Give 
 Audubon Near You 
 Native Plants Database 
 Audubon App 
 Search the site 
 Search Bird Guide 
 Near me 
 Your Location
 Getting up nearby offices, centers, sanctures and chapters
 Showing offices, chapters, centers and sanctuaries near you .
 Zip Code 
 Change 
 Use My Location 
 No Audubon locations nearby
 Explore our locations 
 Nearest Centers and Sanctuaries
 Nearest Chapters
 State Office
 More Near You
 Donate 
 Open Search 
 Bird Guide 
 Pigeons and Doves 
 White-winged Dove 
 Listen 2
 White-winged Dove
 Adult. Photo: Ann Pacheco/Audubon Photography Awards 
 Adults. Photo: Barbara Jbaird/Audubon Photography Awards 
 Adult. Photo: Becky Matsubara/Flickr (CC-BY-2.0) 
 Adult. Photo: David Blinder/Audubon Photography Awards 
 Adult. Photo: Carrie and Paul Lehrer/Great Backyard Bird Count 
 Adult. Photo: Kathy and Sam/Flickr (CC-BY-2.0) 
 Adult. Photo: Dawn Scranton/Flickr (CC-BY-2.0) 
 White-winged Dove
 Zenaida asiatica
 At a Glance 
 Range & Identification 
 Behavior 
 Conservation 
 Back to Top 
 At a Glance
 Related to the Mourning Dove, but a larger and bulkier bird, the White-winged Dove is mainly a summer resident in the southwestern states. It is abundant in some regions, and streamside groves or desert washes may echo with the crowing calls of males on spring mornings. In some desert areas, this dove often feeds on the fruits of cactus, and visits their flowers for nectar; it is an important pollinator of the giant saguaro cactus. 
 All bird guide text and rangemaps adapted from Lives of North American Birds by Kenn Kaufman© 1996, used by permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. All rights reserved. 
 Category 
 Pigeon-like Birds, Pigeons and Doves
 IUCN Status 
 Least Concern
 Habitat 
 Arroyos and Canyons, Desert and Arid Habitats, Fields, Meadows, and Grasslands, Forests and Woodlands, Shrublands, Savannas, and Thickets, Urban and Suburban Habitats
 Region 
 California, Florida, Rocky Mountains, Southeast, Southwest, Texas
 Behavior 
 Direct Flight
 Population 
 14.000.000
 Range & Identification
 Migration & Range Maps
 Most of those nesting in the southwestern United States move south in fall. White-winged Dove migration is early in both seasons, most birds arriving by March and leaving in September. A few remain through winter north of the border, especially in suburban areas. Strays sometimes wander far north of breeding range. Regular along Gulf Coast in winter. Florida birds are mostly permanent residents. 
 Description
 Sexes similar — Length: 11 - 12.6 in (28 - 32 cm); wingspan: 19 - 23 in (48 - 58 cm); weight: 4.9 - 5.6 oz (140 - 160 g). The White-winged Dove is bulkier than a Mourning Dove, with a shorter tail. Big white wing patches and white tips on outer tail feathers, most obvious in flight. 
 Size 
 About the size of a Crow, About the size of a Robin
 Color 
 Black, Blue, Brown, Gray, White
 Wing Shape 
 Broad, Pointed
 Tail Shape 
 Rounded, Square-tipped
 Songs and Calls
 Drawn out hooo-hooo-ho-hooo or who-cooks-for-you. 
 Call Pattern 
 Falling, Flat
 Call Type 
 Hoot, Odd
 Habitat
 River woods, mesquites, saguaros, groves, towns. Found in a variety of semi-open habitats in southwest, including native brushlands in Texas and deserts farther west, plus chaparral and open oak woods; also adapts quickly to altered habitats, such as farmland, suburbs, citrus groves, plantings of trees in grassland. In winter, those remaining north of Mexico are mostly in towns. 
 Sign up for Audubon's newsletter to learn more about birds like the White-winged Dove
 Email 
 Zip 
 Phone (optional) 
 By submitting my mobile number I agree to receive text messages from Audubon at 42248 about how I can help birds, including donation requests. Up to 4 msgs/month. Message and data rates may apply. Text HELP for more information. Text STOP to stop receiving messages. Read our  Privacy Policy  and  Terms & Conditions .
 This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
 Behavior
 Eggs
 A White-winged Dove generally lays 2 eggs, sometimes 1-4. Eggs are white to very pale buff. Incubation is by both parents, 13-14 days. 
 Young
 Both parents feed young "pigeon milk." Young leave nest at about 13-16 days, are fed by parents for some time thereafter. 2-3 broods per year. 
 Feeding Behavior
 Forages mostly on ground, also up in trees, shrubs, cactus. Often seen at top of giant saguaro cactus, feeding on fruit or flowers (may get much of its water that way in desert areas). 
 Diet
 The White-winged Dove feeds on seeds of many wild plants, also some cultivated grains; may eat acorns where available. Feeds on fruits, especially those of cactus, also smaller berries. Will come to large flowers, apparently for nectar. 
 Nesting
 May nest in colonies, especially where nest sites in an isolated grove are surrounded by good feeding areas. In courtship display, the male White-winged Dove flaps up and then glides down in wide circle. While perched, male raises tail and quickly fans it open and shut to flash black and white tail pattern. Both members of pair go through ritualized nodding and preening motions. Nest site is in shrub, tree, or cactus, usually 4-30 ft above ground. Placed on horizontal limb or fork in branch, sometimes on top of old nest or on tangle of thorns. Nest is a flimsy platform of sticks. Male brings most material, female builds. 
 Conservation
 Conservation Status
 White-winged Dove has probably declined originally with clearing of native habitat, but has adapted well to altered environment, now abundant and probably expanding range to the north. 
 Change in Abundance Over Time
 Drawing on more than a century of community science from the Christmas Bird Count (CBC), this chart shows how this species’ relative abundance has shifted in recent decades. Explore more and get involved in the CBC .
 Climate Map
 Audubon’s scientists have used 140 million bird observations and sophisticated climate models to project how climate change will affect the range of the White-winged Dove. Learn even more in Audubon’s Survival By Degrees project .
 Climate Threats Facing the White-winged Dove
 Choose a temperature scenario below to see which threats will affect this species as warming increases. The same climate change-driven threats that put birds at risk will affect other wildlife and people, too.
 Audubon 
 Discover
 Who We Are 
 Our History 
 Leadership & Board of Directors 
 Notice of Annual Meeting 
 Reports & Financials 
 Audubon Action Fund 
 Connect
 Work With Us 
 Fellowships 
 Press Room 
 Contact Us 
 Sign up for SMS updates 
 Support Us
 Audubon Near You 
 Audubon Products 
 Donate Now 
 Legacy Gifts 
 Renew Membership 
 Charity Navigator 
 © 2026 National Audubon Society 
 Legal Notices 
 Privacy Policy 
 Contact Us 
 Join our mission
 Get the Latest Bird Conservation News
 Email 
 Zip 
 Phone (optional) 
 By submitting my mobile number I agree to receive text messages from Audubon at 42248 about how I can help birds, including donation requests. Up to 4 msgs/month. Message and data rates may apply. Text HELP for more information. Text STOP to stop receiving messages. Read our  Privacy Policy  and  Terms & Conditions .
 This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
 Thank you for signing up!
 Great Egret. Photo: Melissa Groo/Audubon Photography Awards 
 Attention!
 ¡Atención!
 Attention!
 La página que intenta visitar no está disponible en español. ¡Disculpa!
 La page que vous souhaitez consulter n'est pas disponible en français. Désolé!
 The page you are about to visit is not available in the language you selected. Sorry!
 The page you are about to visit is not available in Spanish. Sorry!
 The page you are about to visit is not available in French. Sorry!
 OK