Black-bellied Whistling-Duck | Audubon Field Guide 
 Skip to main content 
 More from Audubon 
 Shop Audubon 
 Magazine 
 Menu 
 Audubon 
 Our Work 
 Protecting Bird Habitats 
 Coasts and Oceans 
 Rivers, Lakes, and Wetlands 
 Grasslands, Aridlands, and Forests 
 Boreal Forest of Canada 
 Cities, Towns, and Parks 
 Latin America and the Caribbean 
 Bending the Bird Curve 
 Climate Solutions 
 Our Climate Strategy 
 Birds and Clean Energy 
 Natural Climate Solutions 
 Restoration and Resiliency 
 Policy and Advocacy 
 Policy Leadership 
 Climate Policy and Renewable Energy 
 Our Science in Action 
 Audubon Science 
 Migratory Bird Initiative 
 Birds and Climate Change 
 Important Bird Areas 
 Latest News 
 Bird and Conservation News 
 Press Room 
 Why Birds? 
 About Us 
 Who We Are 
 Our Mission 
 Our History 
 Equity, Diversity, Inclusion & Belonging 
 Leadership & Board of Directors 
 Reports & Financials 
 Find Audubon Near You 
 Work With Us 
 Where We Work 
 States 
 Alaska 
 Arizona 
 Arkansas 
 California 
 Colorado 
 Connecticut 
 Florida 
 Illinois 
 Indiana 
 Iowa 
 Louisiana 
 Maine 
 Maryland 
 Michigan 
 Minnesota 
 Mississippi 
 Missouri 
 Nebraska 
 New Mexico 
 New York 
 North Carolina 
 North Dakota 
 Ohio 
 Pennsylvania 
 South Carolina 
 South Dakota 
 Texas 
 Utah 
 Vermont 
 Washington 
 Wisconsin 
 Wyoming 
 Americas 
 Belize 
 Bolivia 
 Canada 
 Chile 
 Colombia 
 Ecuador 
 Mexico 
 Panama 
 Peru 
 The Bahamas 
 Explore Birds 
 Bird Search & ID 
 Visit Our Guide To North American Birds 
 Download the Audubon Bird Guide App 
 Get Into Birding 
 Birding Hub 
 How to Get Started 
 Tips For Identifying Birds 
 Birding Advice and Stories 
 Frequently Asked Bird Questions 
 Birding at Home 
 Bird Feeding and Care 
 Search for Native Plants 
 Audubon Birdseed, Houses, and More 
 Gear Guides 
 Gear and Resources 
 Binocular Guide 
 Spotting Scope Guide 
 Photography 
 Bird Photography Hub 
 Tips for Photographing Birds 
 Camera and Equipment Advice 
 Audubon Photography Awards 
 Avian Art 
 The Aviary 
 The Audubon Mural Project 
 John James Audubon's Birds of America 
 The Sketch by Jason Polan 
 The Birdsong Project 
 Search for Birds in Your Area 
 Get Involved 
 Take Action 
 Action Center 
 Speak Up for Wetlands and Streams 
 Ask Congress to Restore Habitat on Public Lands 
 Urge Congress to Advance a Conservation-Forward Farm Bill 
 Audubon Near You 
 Audubon Near You 
 Events 
 Audubon on Campus 
 Visit an Audubon Center 
 Community Science 
 Community Science at Audubon 
 Christmas Bird Count 
 Climate Watch 
 Great Backyard Bird Count 
 For Kids 
 Audubon for Kids 
 Audubon Adventures 
 Ways to Get Involved 
 Membership & Giving 
 Membership 
 Become a Member 
 Renew Your Membership 
 Gift a Membership 
 Donate 
 Donate 
 Great Egret Society 
 The Canopy 
 In Memorial Gifts 
 In Honor Gifts 
 Matching Gifts 
 Giving Other Assets 
 Gifts of Appreciated Stock 
 IRA Charitable Gifts 
 Real Estate Gifts 
 Legacy Gifts 
 Donor Advised Funds 
 Shop 
 Audubon Marketplace 
 Birdhouses and Feeders 
 Bird Seed 
 Calendars 
 Puzzles, Games and DIY Kits 
 More Ways to Give 
 Near me 
 Search 
 Search Audubon 
 Recent
 Popular Search
 Ways to Give 
 Audubon Near You 
 Native Plants Database 
 Audubon App 
 Search the site 
 Search Bird Guide 
 Near me 
 Your Location
 Getting up nearby offices, centers, sanctures and chapters
 Showing offices, chapters, centers and sanctuaries near you .
 Zip Code 
 Change 
 Use My Location 
 No Audubon locations nearby
 Explore our locations 
 Nearest Centers and Sanctuaries
 Nearest Chapters
 State Office
 More Near You
 Donate 
 Open Search 
 Bird Guide 
 Ducks and Geese 
 Black-bellied Whistling-Duck 
 Listen 5
 Black-bellied Whistling-Duck
 Adult. Photo: Olivia Graves/Great Backyard Bird Count Participant 
 Adults. Photo: Jerry Black/Audubon Photography Awards 
 Adults. Photo: Jerry Black/Audubon Photography Awards 
 Adults. Photo: Don Swamback/Audubon Photography Awards 
 Adult. Photo: Denise Valentin/Audubon Photography Awards 
 Adult. Photo: Brian Kushner/Audubon Photography Awards 
 Adults. Photo: Brian Kushner/Audubon Photography Awards 
 Adult. Photo: Brian Kushner/Audubon Photography Awards 
 Black-bellied Whistling-Duck
 Dendrocygna autumnalis
 At a Glance 
 Range & Identification 
 Behavior 
 Conservation 
 Back to Top 
 At a Glance
 A spectacularly marked, sociable, noisy waterfowl. The Black-bellied Whistling-Duck often rests on low snags above water, and may perch high in dead trees. In North America found mostly near Mexican border, but has increased in numbers recently, partly because it will use nest boxes put out for it. In some areas (such as coastal Texas), feeding Black-bellied Whistling-Duck has become popular, with landowners tossing out corn near ponds to attract hundreds of whistling-ducks. 
 All bird guide text and rangemaps adapted from Lives of North American Birds by Kenn Kaufman© 1996, used by permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. All rights reserved. 
 Category 
 Duck-like Birds, Ducks and Geese
 IUCN Status 
 Least Concern
 Habitat 
 Coasts and Shorelines, Freshwater Wetlands, Lakes, Ponds, and Rivers, Saltwater Wetlands
 Region 
 Florida, Mid Atlantic, Southeast, Southwest, Texas
 Behavior 
 Direct Flight, Formation, Swimming
 Population 
 1.000.000
 Range & Identification
 Migration & Range Maps
 The Black-bellied Whistling-Duck is not strongly migratory. Flocks disappear in winter from some, but not all, northern breeding areas. Small flocks may wander well to north of normal range. 
 Description
 Sexes similar — Length: 18.5–21 in (47–51 cm); wingspan: 2 ft 6 in (76 cm); weight: 1 lb 7 oz–2 lb 4 oz (650 g–1 kg). Black-bellied Whistling-Duck adults are unmistakable: long-necked and long-legged, patterned in chestnut, gray, and black, with a bright pink bill. White wing patch striking in flight. Young Black-bellied Whistling-Duck has a gray bill, muted colors, but shows a hint of the adult pattern. 
 Size 
 About the size of a Crow, About the size of a Mallard or Herring Gull
 Color 
 Black, Brown, Orange, Pink, Tan, White
 Wing Shape 
 Broad, Fingered, Rounded
 Tail Shape 
 Rounded, Short
 Songs and Calls
 Mellow whistles. 
 Call Pattern 
 Undulating
 Call Type 
 Chatter, Whistle
 Habitat
 Shallow ponds and fresh marshes. The Black-bellied Whistling-Duck favors shallow freshwater lakes and may come to those in open country, but seems to favor ponds surrounded by trees. Species will nest on ground or in tree cavities. When foraging, the Black-bellied Whistling-Duck is often found in dry fields, also in irrigated land. 
 Sign up for Audubon's newsletter to learn more about birds like the Black-bellied Whistling-Duck
 Email 
 Zip 
 Phone (optional) 
 By submitting my mobile number I agree to receive text messages from Audubon at 42248 about how I can help birds, including donation requests. Up to 4 msgs/month. Message and data rates may apply. Text HELP for more information. Text STOP to stop receiving messages. Read our  Privacy Policy  and  Terms & Conditions .
 This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
 Behavior
 Eggs
 12-16. Whitish. Females may lay eggs in each others' nests; such "dump nests" may have 50-60 or more eggs. Incubation is by both sexes, lasting 25-30 days. 
 Young
 Black-bellied Whistling-Duck ducklings in cavity nests can climb walls of cavity, jump to ground 1 or 2 days after hatching. Young tended by both parents, find all their own food. Young fledge at about 2 months. 
 Feeding Behavior
 The Black-bellied Whistling-Duck does much of its foraging on land, and may feed by day or night. Flocks come to harvested fields to feed on waste grain, also to prairies and overgrown pastures. In shallow water the Black-bellied Whistling-Duck may wade to reach emergent plants, or may dabble at surface or tip up to reach under water. 
 Diet
 Mainly seeds and grains. The Black-bellied Whistling-Duck feeds mostly on seeds of various grasses, also of smartweed and other plants. Insects, snails, and other invertebrates make up less than 10% of diet. 
 Nesting
 May mate for life. Black-bellied Whistling-Duck often nests in colonies. The nest site is usually in a tree cavity or broken-off stub, 4-20 ft above ground or water. Tree nests on land are usually close to water, but can be up to 1/4 mile from it. Also frequently nests on ground, in dense low growth near water. Many now use nest boxes; have also nested in chimneys, barns. Cavity nests are bare or with a few wood chips, but ground nests are woven of grasses and weeds. 
 Conservation
 Conservation Status
 The North American Black-bellied Whistling-Duck population has greatly increased since the 1950s. In Texas and eastern Mexico, providing of nest boxes probably helped this expansion. In Arizona (where most nests apparently are on ground), species was very rare before 1949, since then the Black-bellied Whistling-Duck has become a fairly common nesting bird. 
 Change in Abundance Over Time
 Drawing on more than a century of community science from the Christmas Bird Count (CBC), this chart shows how this species’ relative abundance has shifted in recent decades. Explore more and get involved in the CBC .
 Climate Map
 Audubon’s scientists have used 140 million bird observations and sophisticated climate models to project how climate change will affect the range of the Black-bellied Whistling-Duck. Learn even more in Audubon’s Survival By Degrees project .
 Climate Threats Facing the Black-bellied Whistling-Duck
 Choose a temperature scenario below to see which threats will affect this species as warming increases. The same climate change-driven threats that put birds at risk will affect other wildlife and people, too.
 Audubon 
 Discover
 Who We Are 
 Our History 
 Leadership & Board of Directors 
 Notice of Annual Meeting 
 Reports & Financials 
 Audubon Action Fund 
 Connect
 Work With Us 
 Fellowships 
 Press Room 
 Contact Us 
 Sign up for SMS updates 
 Support Us
 Audubon Near You 
 Audubon Products 
 Donate Now 
 Legacy Gifts 
 Renew Membership 
 Charity Navigator 
 © 2026 National Audubon Society 
 Legal Notices 
 Privacy Policy 
 Contact Us 
 Join our mission
 Get the Latest Bird Conservation News
 Email 
 Zip 
 Phone (optional) 
 By submitting my mobile number I agree to receive text messages from Audubon at 42248 about how I can help birds, including donation requests. Up to 4 msgs/month. Message and data rates may apply. Text HELP for more information. Text STOP to stop receiving messages. Read our  Privacy Policy  and  Terms & Conditions .
 This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
 Thank you for signing up!
 Great Egret. Photo: Melissa Groo/Audubon Photography Awards 
 Attention!
 ¡Atención!
 Attention!
 La página que intenta visitar no está disponible en español. ¡Disculpa!
 La page que vous souhaitez consulter n'est pas disponible en français. Désolé!
 The page you are about to visit is not available in the language you selected. Sorry!
 The page you are about to visit is not available in Spanish. Sorry!
 The page you are about to visit is not available in French. Sorry!
 OK