=== page 1 ===
2026-20272026-2027
CALIFORNIA MAMMAL 
HUNTING REGULATIONS
FOR ALL MAMMAL HUNTING IN CALIFORNIA
UPDATED JULY 1, 2026

=== page 2 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Gavin Newsom, Governor
NATURAL RESOURCES 
AGENCY
Wade Crowfoot, Secretary
DEPARTMENT OF FISH AND 
WILDLIFE
Meghan Hertel, Director
FISH AND GAME 
COMMISSION
Eric Sklar, President 
St. Helena
Darius W. Anderson,  
Vice President  
Kenwood
Jacque Hostler-Carmesin, 
Member 
McKinleyville
Samantha Murray, Member 
La Jolla
Erika Zavaleta, Member 
Santa Cruz
Melissa Miller-Henson,  
Executive Director
P.O. Box 944209,  
Sacramento, CA 94244-2090 
(916) 653-4899
Email: fgc@fgc.ca.gov
Website: fgc.ca.gov
On the Cover: Ahzira C.
Contents
CDFW Contact Information .....................................................4
Unlawful Actions ......................................................................5
2026 Hunting License and Tag Fees ......................................7
Foreword ..................................................................................8
What’s New in 2026 .................................................................9
Conservation and Management Plans .................................10
Big Game Conservation .........................................................11
General Information ................................................................12
Hunter Stewardship .................................................................16
Hunting and Off Highway Vehicle Recreation .....................17
Hunter Education .....................................................................18
Free Hunting Days ...................................................................19
Authority of the Commission ..................................................20
General Provisions and Defintions .........................................21
Geographic Provisions ............................................................26
Use of Nonlead Ammo............................................................27
Use of Lights..............................................................................28
Use of Dogs ..............................................................................30
How to Properly Fill Out a Tag ................................................34
Big Game Hunting ...................................................................36
Deer Zones and Additional Hunts ..........................................38
Deer Hunting ............................................................................40
Archery Deer Hunting .............................................................60
2026 Deer Hunts .......................................................................66
Deer Reporting .........................................................................72
Elk Hunting ................................................................................78
Pronghorn Antelope Hunt Zones ............................................89
Pronghorn Antelope Hunting ..................................................90
2026 Pronghorn Antelope Hunts .............................................94
Bighorn Sheep Hunt Zones ......................................................95
Bighorn Sheep Hunting ...........................................................96
2026 Bighorn Sheep Hunts ......................................................99
Bear Hunt Zones .......................................................................100
Bear Hunting.............................................................................101
Resident Small Game ..............................................................104
Wild Pig Hunting/Exotic Game Mammals .............................106
Nongame Animals ..................................................................109
Gray Wolf in California ............................................................111
Declaration of Importation .....................................................113
Chronic Wasting Disease ........................................................115
=== page 3 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
3
NONDISCRIMINATION
Any person excluded from participation 
in, denied the benefits of, or otherwise 
subjected to discrimination under any 
program of the California Department of 
Fish and Wildlife, on the grounds of age, 
race, national origin, disability, religious 
or political affiliation, color, sex, ances -
try, marital status, or sexual orientations, 
should contact the nearest regional of-
fice of the Department or its headquar-
ters located at 715 P Street, Sacramento, 
CA 95814, (916) 445-0411. In addition, you 
may contact the U.S. Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission, Washington, 
D.C. 20506 or a local EEOC office list -
ed in your phone directory under U.S. 
Government.
Alternate communication format avail-
able upon request, call (916) 322-8911. 
Call the California Relay (telephone) 
Service for the deaf or hearing-impaired 
from TDD phones at 800-735-2929 or 711.
PARTICIPATING IN THE 
REGULATORY PROCESS
The California Fish and Game Commission 
is composed of five members who are ap-
pointed by the Governor and confirmed 
by the State Senate. The Commission 
establishes hunting and sport fishing 
regulations including seasons, bag and 
possession limits, methods of take, area 
descriptions and any special conditions. 
In addition, the Commission formulates 
general policies for the Department of 
Fish and Wildlife. Monthly topical meetings 
are held to hear regulation change pro-
posals. The public may make recommen-
dations in writing before a Commission 
meeting or present its proposals verbally 
at the meeting. The Commission’s meet-
ing schedule, including specific topics, 
dates and locations, is posted on their 
web site fgc.ca.gov.
Written comments can be directed to the 
Fish and Game Commission at P.O. Box 
944209, Sacramento, CA 94244-2090, or 
by e-mail to fgc@fgc.ca.gov. Comments 
sent by e-mail should include a full name 
and mailing address. The Commission also 
has established a list server for information 
distribution available on their web site fgc.
ca.gov.
READY TO MAKE A 
DIFFERENCE?
wildlife.ca.gov/Enforcement
NOW HIRING
WILDLIFE OFFICERS!
=== page 4 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
4
1 - Northern Region
Serving Del Norte, Humboldt, Lassen, 
Mendocino, Modoc, Shasta, Siskiyou, Tehama 
and Trinity counties
601 Locust Street,  
Redding 96001 
(530) 225-2300
AskRegion1@wildlife.ca.gov
No public license sales counter. Customer service rep -
resentatives are available in person to validate hunting 
tags, answer questions, and provide and receive appli -
cations that will be fulfilled by mail.
Eureka Field Office
619 Second Street,  
Eureka 95501 
(707) 445-6493
2 - North Central Region
Serving Alpine, Amador, Butte, Calaveras, 
Colusa, El Dorado, Glenn, Lake, Nevada, 
Placer, Plumas, Sacramento, San Joaquin, 
Sierra, Sutter, Yolo and Yuba counties
1701 Nimbus Road,  
Rancho Cordova 95670  
(916) 358-2900
R2info@wildlife.ca.gov
3 - Bay Delta Region
Serving Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, Napa, 
Sacramento, San Mateo, Santa Clara, Santa 
Cruz, San Francisco, San Joaquin, Solano, 
Sonoma and Yolo counties
2825 Cordelia Road, Ste. 100,  
Fairfield 94534  
(707) 428-2002
AskBDR@wildlife.ca.gov
Stockton Field Office
2109 Arch Airport Road, Suite 100,  
Stockton 95206  
(209) 234-3420
4 - Central Region
Serving Fresno, Kern, Kings, Madera, Mariposa, 
Merced, Monterey, San Benito, San Luis Obispo, 
Stanislaus, Tulare and Tuolumne counties
1234 E. Shaw Avenue,  
Fresno 93710  
(559) 243-4005
Reg4Assistant@wildlife.ca.gov
5 - South Coast Region
Serving Los Angeles, Orange, San Diego, Santa 
Barbara and Ventura counties
3883 Ruffin Road,  
San Diego 92123  
(858) 467-4201
AskR5@wildlife.ca.gov
6 - Inland Deserts Region
Serving Imperial, Inyo, Mono, Riverside and San 
Bernardino counties
3602 Inland Empire Blvd., Ste. C-220,  
Ontario 91764 
(909) 484-0167
AskRegion6@wildlife.ca.gov
Licenses are not sold at this office.
7 - Marine Region
Serving the entire California coast, from border 
to border and three nautical miles out to sea.
20 Lower Ragsdale Drive, Ste. 100,  
Monterey 93940 
(831) 649-2870
AskMarine@wildlife.ca.gov
Office is closed to the public. Licenses are not 
sold at this office. 
DEPARTMENT OF FISH AND WILDLIFE REGIONAL OFFICES
CDFW Contact Information
=== page 5 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
5
IT IS UNLAWFUL TO DO THE FOLLOWING
STAY CONNECTED TO CDFW
Having your e-mail address and mobile number will 
enable the CDFW to send you information you can use, 
such as license renewal and courtesy report card dead-
line reminders, and California fishing information. When 
purchasing a license from a license agent or when you 
log in to the Online License Sales and Services, update 
your communication preferences and provide your e-
mail address and mobile number.
https://www.licenses.wildlife.ca.gov/internetsales/
Fish and Game Code, Section 1050.6, and California 
Government Code, Section 11015.5, prohibit the CDFW 
from selling or sharing your personal information with 
any third party.
It is the hunter’s responsibility to know and follow the law.
The California statutes governing many aspects of hunt -
ing, firearms, fishing, and the use of public lands, are 
found in the California Fish and Game Code (FGC) . 
Hunting and fishing activities are further regulated by the 
California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Natural Resources 
(T14 CCR), and the California Penal Code (PC). 
Additionally, California counties and cities have adopt -
ed local ordinances which regulate and restrict hunting 
activities within their jurisdiction.
The Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) , governs many 
aspects of hunting and fishing on federal lands, specific 
species, and other activities under federal jurisdiction.
(These are not complete regulations. Some sections are 
abbreviated.)
Safety
Hunt while intoxicated. FGC §3001
Shoot any firearm from or upon a public road or highway. 
PEN §374(c)
Shoot at any game bird or mammal from a powerboat, 
sailboat, motor vehicle, or aircraft while under power or 
still moving from use of sail or motor vehicle, or airplane. 
FGC §3002 ...
... Except when the motor of such motorboat, airboat, or 
sailboat has been shut off and its progress has ceased 
and the vessel is drifting, beached, moored, resting at 
anchor or being propelled by paddle, oar, or pole. CCR 
T14 §251(a)(1)
Licenses
Transfer, use, possess or alter any license, tag, stamp, per-
mit, application or reservation. FGC §1052
Hunt any game bird or mammal without having the re -
quired licenses, tags and/or stamps in possession. FGC 
§1054.2
Change, mutilate, or transfer any license, tag, or stamp; 
Have in possession while hunting any license belonging 
to another person. FGC §1052
Sell or barter game taken under authority of a hunting 
license. FGC §3039
Fail to exhibit on the demand of a Wildlife Officer, all li -
censes, tags, fish, or wildlife taken or otherwise dealt with 
under the Fish and Game Code, and any device or ap -
paratus designed to be, and capable of being, used to 
take fish or wildlife. FGC §2012
Damage another’s property or injure livestock while hunt-
ing. FGC §2004
Prohibited Species
Take spike buck. T14 CCR §351(c)
Methods of Take
Use an artificial light to assist in taking any game bird or 
game mammal. FGC §2005(a)
Use of a shotgun larger than 10 gauge for the taking of 
any game bird or game mammal, or a shotgun capable 
of holding more than three shells in the magazine and 
chamber combined. FGC §2010; T14 CCR §311(a) and 
§353(d)
Take game birds, game mammals or furbearing mam -
mals except as permitted by regulations. T14 CCR §250
Hunt with a crossbow during archery season (except with 
a Disabled Archer Permit). T14 CCR §354(g)
Possess a firearm while hunting during archery season or 
while hunting during the general season with an archery-
only tag. T14 CCR §354(h)
Hunt with bow or crossbow without a draw weight of at 
least 30 pounds for a bow or 125 pounds for a cross bow. 
T14 CCR §354(f)
Pursue, drive, herd, or take any bird or mammal from any 
type of motor-driven air or land vehicles, motorboat, air -
boat, sailboat, or snowmobile, except when the motor 
is off and/or the sails furled and it is drifting, beached, 
moored, resting at anchor, or is being propelled by pad-
dle, oar or pole. T14 CCR §251
Use of Bait
Knowingly feed big game mammals. T14 CCR §251.3
Take game birds and mammals within 400 yards of any 
Unlawful Actions
=== page 6 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
6
IT IS UNLAWFUL TO DO THE FOLLOWING
baited area. This does not apply to the taking of game 
birds and mammals on or over standing crops, croplands, 
or grains found scattered solely as the result of normal 
agricultural operations or procedures. T14 CCR §257.5
Take bears within 400 yards of any garbage dump or 
bait. T14 CCR §365(e)
Hunting Hours
Hunt big game or exotic game mammals from one- half 
hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise. T14 CCR 
§352 and §376
Public Road or Way Open to the Public
Possess a loaded rifle or shotgun in any vehicle or con -
veyance or its attachments which is standing on or along 
or is being driven on or along any public highway or oth-
er way open to the public. FGC §2006
Public road or way open to the public includes any roads 
or established way open to public access, even if they 
are not paved. FGC §3004(b)
Nock or fit the notch in the end of an arrow to a bow -
string or crossbow string in a ready-to-fire position while in 
or on any vehicle. T14 CCR §354(i)
Possess a short barreled shotgun (Barrel less than 18 inch-
es), or a short-barreled rifle (Barrel less than 16 inches). 
PC §33210
To deposit, permit to pass into, or place where it can pass 
into the waters of the state, or to abandon, dispose of, or 
throw away, within 150 feet of the high water mark of the 
waters of the state, any cans, bottles, garbage, rubbish, 
or the viscera or carcass of any dead mammal, or the 
carcass of any dead bird. FGC §5652
Intentionally discharge a firearm or release an arrow or 
crossbow bolt from a bow or crossbow upon or across 
any highway, road or other way open to vehicular traffic. 
CCR T14 §354(e) and FGC §3004(b)
It is unlawful for any person, other than the owner, person 
in possession of the premises, or a person having the ex -
press permission of the owner or person in possession of 
the premises, to hunt or to discharge while hunting, any 
firearm or other deadly weapon within 150 yards of any 
occupied dwelling house, residence, or other building or 
any barn or other outbuilding used in connection there -
with. The 150-yard area is a “safety zone.” FGC §3004(a)
Firearms
Fail to send a complete written report to the Department 
within 48 hours after killing or wounding while hunting, 
any human being, or domestic animal belonging to an -
other, or after witnessing such killing or wounding.
Use a shotgun larger than 10 gauge
Use, for the taking of any game bird or game mammal, a 
shotgun capable of holding more than three shells in the 
magazine and chamber combined
Use or possess shotshells containing shot size larger than 
No. BB in lead or No. T in steel when hunting migratory 
game birds
Use shot that is not loose in the shell for taking resident 
small game and migratory game birds
Possess a machine gun, silencer, shotgun with barrel less 
than 18 inches in length, or rifle with barrel less than 16 
inches in length.
Possess a loaded rifle or shotgun in any vehicle or con -
veyance or its attachments which is standing on or along 
or is being driven on or along any public highway or oth-
er way open to the public. FGC §2006
Parks and Refuges
Possess in any State Game Refuge any bird or mammal 
or part thereof, or any weapon capable of taking any 
bird or mammal. FGC §10500
Possession of firearms or bows and arrows by persons trav-
eling through game refuges on a public highway or other 
public thoroughfare or right of way is permitted when the 
firearms are taken apart or encased and unloaded, and 
the bows are unstrung. FGC §10506
Hunt in some National Park or Monument, in State of 
California Beaches and Parks or Monument areas, or in 
any State Game Refuge, or to shoot into such an area 
any weapon capable of taking any bird.
Possess in any State Game Refuge any bird or mammal 
or part thereof, or any weapon capable of taking any 
bird. However, possession of firearms or bows and arrows 
by persons traveling through game refuges on a public 
highway or other public thoroughfare or right of way is 
permitted when the firearms are taken apart or encased 
and unloaded, and the bows are unstrung.
National Parks and Monuments have special regulations 
regarding the possession of weapons, game and the run-
ning of hunting dogs. Check with federal officials before 
entering these areas.
=== page 7 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
7
2026 HUNTING LICENSE AND TAG FEES
Interested in a Lifetime Hunting License?  
Visit wildlife.ca.gov/Licensing/Lifetime for details!
License Fee
Resident Hunting License $64.54
Nonresident Hunting License $225.46
Junior Hunting License $17.02
Disabled Veteran & Recovering Service Member Hunting License 
Initial qualification must be done at a CDFW license sales office, see page 10 for more 
information.
$10.54
Duplicate Hunting License $14.30
2-Day Nonresident Hunting License 
Valid only for taking resident and migratory game birds, resident small game mammals, 
fur-bearing mammals, wild pigs, and non-game mammals
$64.54
Drawing Application, Tag, or Validation Fee
Resident 1st Deer Tag/Application $42.38
Nonresident 1st Deer Tag/Application $377.35
Resident 2nd Deer Tag/Application $52.92
Nonresident 2nd Deer Tag/Application $377.35
Elk Tag Drawing Application $8.38
Pronghorn Antelope Tag Drawing Application $8.38
Bighorn Sheep Tag Drawing Application $8.38
Resident Bear Tag $62.90
Nonresident Bear Tag $397.60
Resident Wild Pig Validation $28.34
Nonresident Wild Pig Validation $101.26
Duplicate Big Game Tag 
Available at any CDFW license sales office. $13.65
Deer Tag Non-Reporting Fee $21.60
2026 Hunting License and Tag Fees
=== page 8 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
8
This booklet contains information from both the California 
Fish and Game Code (FGC) and Title 14 of the California 
Code of Regulations (CCR). For detailed information, re-
fer to the appropriate code or contact the Department 
of Fish and Wildlife (Department).
These excerpts are provided as a courtesy and are not 
to be used as legal documents. Since the regulation and 
FGC sections may be amended at any time, it is the read-
er’s responsibility to be knowledgeable of, and abide by, 
all laws and regulations in effect at the time they partici-
pate in any commercial or recreational fishing or hunting 
activity. Any discrepancies between this document and 
the regulation and FGC sections from which they were 
prepared will be enforced and adjudicated according 
to the official code sections and regulations in effect on 
the date the activity takes place.
The official California Code of Regulations may be ac-
cessed through Thompson Reuters Westlaw at https://
govt.westlaw.com/calregs/Index. The official Fish and 
Game Code may be accessed through California 
Legislative Information at http://leginfo.legislature.
ca.gov/faces/home.xhtml.
California Fish and Game Commission
The Mission of the California Fish and Game Commission 
is, on behalf of California citizens, to ensure the long term 
sustainability of California’s fish and wildlife resources by:
• Guiding the ongoing scientific evaluation and assess-
ment of California’s fish and wildlife resources;
• Setting California’s fish and wildlife resource manage-
ment policies and ensuring these are implemented 
by the Department of Fish and Wildlife;
• Establishing appropriate fish and wildlife resource 
management rules and regulations; and
• Building active fish and wildlife resource manage-
ment partnerships with individual landowners, the 
public and interest groups, and federal, state, and 
local resource management agencies.
Department of Fish and Wildlife
The mission of the Department of Fish and Wildlife is to 
manage California’s diverse fish, wildlife, and plant re -
sources, and the habitats upon which they depend, for 
their ecological values and for their use and enjoyment 
by the public.
The Department is charged with the administration and 
enforcement of the FGC and Title 14. The Department 
is organized with the Director and headquarters staff in 
Sacramento, and seven regional managers coordinat -
ing the operations in their respective portions of the state. 
The Director is the appointing power of all Department 
employees, who are responsible to the Director for the 
proper performance of their duties and responsibilities.
Most of the revenue for the Department comes from the 
Fish and Wildlife Preservation Fund, with a limited amount 
from other sources (General Fund, Sport Fish Restoration 
Act, Environmental License Plate Fund, and grants). The 
Fish and Wildlife Preservation Fund is supported by the 
sale of sport fishing and hunting licenses, commercial 
licenses, fish landing taxes, and fines and penalties as -
sessed for violation of Fish and Wildlife laws.
All laws or regulations hereunder are either reproduced 
verbatim from the Fish and Game Code or from Title 14 
of the California Code of Regulations, as adopted by the 
California  Fish and Game Commission under authority of 
the Fish and Game Code.
All references to state highway, interstate highway and 
U.S. highway numbers appearing in regulations are as 
designated on the current California State Highway 
map issued by the Business, Transportation and Housing 
Agency at the time such regulations were adopted by 
the California Fish and Game Commission.
FOREWORD
Accessing Hunting Regulations
• Mammal Hunting Booklet (this booklet) 
includes regulations for: hunting small and big game mammals; exotic game mammals; trapping furbearers 
(fox, badger, beaver and raccoon, etc.); hunting nongame animals (bobcat, coyote, weasel, etc.)
• Big Game Hunting Digest 
includes hunt seasons, tag quotas and drawing for deer, elk, pronghorn antelope and bighorn sheep; bear 
and wild pig hunting; other related hunting regulations
• Mammal Hunting Regulations HTML
• Waterfowl, Upland Game, and Public Use of Department Lands Regulations Booklet
• Upland Game Bird Hunting Regulations HTML 
• Waterfowl Hunting Regulations HTML
• Upland Game Birds Regulations Summary
• Waterfowl Regulations Summary
Foreword
=== page 9 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
9
Desert Bighorn Sheep - Three New Hunt 
Zones
Three new desert bighorn hunt zones are opening in 
the central Mojave Desert: Granite and North Bristol 
Mountains (Zone 11), Providence, Woods, and Hackberry 
Mountains (Zone 12), and Castle Mountains and Piute 
Range (Zone 13). Never before hunted, these zones bring 
fresh opportunity to California’s premier desert bighorn 
hunting.
Net Tag Quota Increases for Desert 
Bighorn Sheep
Tag quotas have been reduced in the White Mountains 
in each period, However, the three new hunt zones add 
5 tags, for a net increase from 27 in 2025 to 30 in 2026. 
Black Bear-Hunt Zone Expansion
The Northeastern California Bear Conservation Region 
(BCR) as defined in the Black Bear Conservation and 
Management Plan for California is being opened to black 
bear (henceforth “bear”) hunting to provide additional 
hunting opportunity within the existing harvest threshold 
of 1,700.
Black Bear-Second Tag
Hunters will also have the option to purchase two bear 
tags at the same time and use them in any order. Take 
will be limited to one legal bear per day and there will be 
no change to the existing harvest threshold of 1,700.
WHAT'S NEW IN 2026
Deer Tag Classification Changes
For the 2026 deer hunting season, the following deer 
tags have changed classifications. Please refer to the 
hunt tables beginning on page 38 for more information. 
From Restricted to Unrestricted deer tag: 
• A19 - tag quota filled on 8/27/2025
• A22 - tag quota filled on 8/8/2025
• B - tag quota filled on 8/9/2025
• D6 zone - tag quota filled on 8/13/2025
• D9 zone- tag quota filled on 9/19/2025
Maximum Preference Points
For the 2026 Big Game Drawing, 24 is the maximum 
number of preference points for any species a hunter 
can have. To look up your total preference points log 
on to your customer profile at licenses.wildlife.ca.gov/
internetsales/ and click on ‘View My Draw Application/
Preference Points’ at the top of the page.
Chronic Wasting Disease Management 
Zones
• Chronic wasting disease (CWD), an always fatal 
neurologic disease affecting deer and elk, and has 
been confirmed in California. 
• Where CWD has been detected in California, 
additional regulations may apply. Hunters must know 
the CWD and regulatory status of their hunt zone and 
adhere to any CWD-related requirements.
• CDFW tests lymph nodes from California hunter-
harvested deer and elk at no cost to hunters. Learn 
more about CWD testing, where CWD has been 
detected, and current CWD management zone 
requirements at wildlife.ca.gov/CWD.
Big Game Application Period
The 2026 Big Game Drawing application period opened 
on April 15, 2026 and closed at midnight on June 2. 2026.
Regulations Publication Survey
The CDFW Regulations Unit has prepared a public survey 
to better understand the needs of California hunters and 
anglers with respect to regulations and the way that 
regulations publications are made available for use. 
Please visit https://wildlife.ca.gov/notices/regulations/
survey to take the survey.
Foreword What’s New in 2026
=== page 10 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
10
Conservation and Management Plan for 
Bighorn Sheep in California
The Conservation and Management Plan for Bighorn 
Sheep in California was published on April 25, 2025. This 
plan brings together traditional, ecological, and historical 
knowledge of bighorn sheep across California, but focuses 
specifically on the conservation and management goals 
for the non-endangered desert bighorn populations. 
Deer Management Plan Update
The California Department of Fish and Wildlife is de -
veloping a comprehensive Deer Conservation and 
Management Plan to guide the long-term conserva -
tion and management of deer populations throughout 
California. Developed with input from a Department 
Technical Advisory Group composed of subject matter 
experts and regional representatives, the plan will estab-
lish a statewide framework for deer monitoring, habitat 
conservation and enhancement, research, and man -
agement. Public scoping meetings, Tribal outreach, and 
stakeholder engagement have helped inform the plan’s 
content. A draft plan is expected to be available for 
public review by the end of 2026. 
Black Bear Conservation and 
Management Plan for California
The Black Bear Conservation and Management Plan for 
California was published on April 14, 2025. This plan pro -
vides the foundation to conserve and manage ecologi -
cally functional bear populations using the best available 
science. It was developed through accelerated research 
coupled with extensive outreach and input from the 
public, scientists, hunting and non-hunting organizations, 
Tribes, and other important partners.
Free Hunting Days
The California Free Hunting Days for the 2026-27 hunting 
season are Saturday, November 21, 2026, and Saturday, 
April 10, 2027 . To hunt on the free hunting days, par -
ticipants must meet requirements established in FGC 
3040, including the possession of a valid Free Hunt Days 
Registration. The Free Hunt Days Registration item will be 
available to claim by October 1, 2026. For more infor -
mation and requirements to participate in California’s 
free hunting days, please visit https://wildlife.ca.gov/
Licensing/Hunting/Free-Hunting-Days.
CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT PLANS
Do you have questions, comments, or concerns regarding CDFW regulations booklets or the regulatory process? 
We want to hear from you! Email the CDFW Regulations Unit at regulations@wildlife.ca.gov or call (916) 902-9223
Conservation and Management Plans
=== page 11 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
11
Hunters Help CDFW Scientists Conserve Big Game Species
How are wildlife populations surveyed? Revenues from state hunter licenses and tags and federal ammuni-
tion taxes directly fund science at CDFW.  This information is essential to ensure sustainable harvest levels that 
conserve big game species while also optimizing opportunities for hunting. CDFW scientists regularly design 
and conduct various types of wildlife surveys to monitor populations of big game species throughout the state. 
Especially in forested regions, CDFW scientists place hundreds of cameras across the landscape and use the 
rate at which deer, bear and other species are photographed to estimate the abundances of these species. 
In more open areas, CDFW scientists conduct surveys from aircraft to get counts of deer, elk, pronghorn, and 
other species. Additionally, bear hunters provide CDFW scientists with tooth samples from harvested bears that 
are used to understand the population structure of the state’s bear population, which is a crucial monitoring 
parameter that would otherwise cost CDFW millions of dollars to collect.
How are the survey results used to set hunting regulations? CDFW scientists use the survey data in statistical 
models to estimate the total population size of each species in different hunt zones or management units, and 
to monitor how these populations change over time. This provides a key source of scientific information to help 
inform how to best conserve big game species and provide diverse opportunities for hunting. CDFW scientists 
use the results to make recommendations to the Fish and Game Commission which is the state regulatory 
authority that adopts harvest adjustments to hunt tag limits, new hunts, and boundary changes. In April 2025, 
CDFW published its completed Black Bear Conservation and Management Plan for California. The center-
piece of the plan is a new, state-of-the-art Integrated Population Model, which will be used to evaluate and 
support any future proposed hunting adjustments for bears.
Deer Survey Using a Camera
 Pronghorn Survey from a Helicopter
Conservation and Management Plans Big Game Conservation
=== page 12 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
12
Hunting License Requirements
First-time applicants applying for a hunting license 
through the CDFW’s ALDS must present one of the fol -
lowing as evidence of hunter education when applying 
for a California hunting license:
• An annual California hunting license issued in any 
prior year; 
• A Two-Day Nonresident California Hunting License 
issued after the 2000 license year; 
• A California certificate of hunter education 
completion or equivalency with a unique number 
imprinted on it ex: (AA00000) or a California hunter 
education certificate with no unique number im -
printed and a California hunter education valida -
tion stamp affixed; 
• A certificate of successful completion of a 
California-approved hunter education course from 
any state or province; or
• A current hunting license or a hunting license issued 
in either of the two previous years from any state or 
province.
Applicants that have previously purchased a hunt -
ing license through CDFW’s ALDS will already have the 
required proof of hunter education evidence in their 
customer profile. To ensure the appropriate customer 
profile is retrieved at a license agent, the CDFW recom -
mends hunters provide the license agent with a previ -
ously issued ALDS license. 
General Tag Provisions
In addition to a California hunting license, license tags 
are also required and must be in possession when tak -
ing deer, bear, pronghorn, elk, bighorn sheep, wild pigs, 
and bobcats. Applicants for black bear tags and wild 
pig validation must be at least 12 years of age at the 
time of application. Applicants for deer tags must be at 
least 12 years of age on or before July 1 of the license 
year for which they are applying or at the time of ap -
plication if they are applying after July 1. 
Validation of License
To be valid, every California hunting license shall be 
signed by the licensee. Proof of identification must be 
presented at the time of initial purchase. In addition, the 
license must contain the following information about the 
licensee: true name, residence address, date of birth, 
height, weight, color of eyes, color of hair, and sex.
Acceptable proof of identification:
• Any license document or GO ID number previously 
issued via ALDS 
• A valid driver’s license or identification card issued 
by the Department of Motor Vehicles or by the 
entity issuing driver’s licenses from the licensee’s 
state of domicile 
• US Birth Certificate 
• US Certificate or Report of Birth Abroad 
• Tribal Identification Card, as defined by each sov -
ereign tribal nation 
• Birth Certificate or passport issued from a US 
Territory 
• US Passport 
• US Military Identification Cards (Active or reserve 
duty, dependent, retired member, discharged from 
service, medical/religious personnel) 
• Certificate of Naturalization or Citizenship 
• A foreign government-issued photo identification 
Applicants who are less than 18 years of age may pro -
vide any form of identification previously described or 
a guardian’s identification (parent or legal guardian 
identification listed).
License Provisions
A valid California hunting license is required to take any 
bird or mammal. Hunters must carry licenses and be 
prepared to show them upon request to any peace of -
ficer. Guns and other equipment used in hunting must 
be shown upon request.
A 2-Day Nonresident California Hunting License is valid 
only for taking resident and migratory game birds, resi -
dent small game mammals, fur-bearing mammals wild 
pigs, and non-game mammals. A 2-Day Nonresident 
California Hunting License is not valid to hunt bighorn 
sheep, black bear, deer, elk, or pronghorn.
Transfer, use, or alteration of license, 
permit, application, or reservation 
(FGC §1052)
It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following:
(a) Transfer any license, tag, stamp, permit, applica -
tion, or reservation.
(b) Use or possess any license, tag, stamp, permit, 
application, or reservation that was not lawfully 
issued to the user or possessor thereof or that was 
obtained by fraud, deceit, or the use of a fake or 
counterfeit application form.
(c) Use or possess any fake or counterfeit license, tag, 
stamp, permit, permit application form, band, or 
seal, made or used for the purpose of evading any 
of the provisions of this code, or regulations adopt -
ed pursuant thereto.
(d) Predate, fail to date, or alter any date of any li -
cense, tag, or permit.
(e) Postdate the date of application or the date of 
GENERAL INFORMATION
General Information
=== page 13 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
13
issuance of the license, tag, or permit. This subdivi -
sion does not apply to the date that a license, tag, 
or permit is valid.
(f) Alter, mutilate, deface, duplicate, or counterfeit any 
license, tag, permit, permit application form, band, 
or seal, or entries thereon, to evade the provisions 
of this code, or any regulations adopted pursuant 
thereto.
Exhibition of licenses, tags, game 
taken, and devices used for taking 
(FGC §2012)
All licenses, tags, and the birds, mammals, fish, reptiles, 
or amphibians taken or otherwise dealt with under this 
code, and any device or apparatus designed to be, 
and capable of being, used to take birds, mammals, 
fish, reptiles, or amphibians shall be exhibited upon de -
mand to any person authorized by the department to 
enforce this code or any law relating to the protection 
and conservation of birds, mammals, fish, reptiles, or 
amphibians.
Junior Hunting License Eligibility
To qualify for a junior hunting license, a hunter must be 
less than 16 years of age as of July 1, of the license year 
for which they are applying. 
Disabled Veteran and Recovering 
Service Member Reduced Fee Hunting 
Licenses
Honorably discharged disabled veterans (resident or 
nonresident) with a 50 percent or greater service-con -
nected disability are eligible for a reduced fee hunt -
ing license. Applicants must submit a letter from the 
Veterans’ Administration documenting that you were 
honorably discharged from the US military and have 
a service-connected disability rating of 50 percent or 
greater.
Recovering service members are eligible for a reduced 
fee hunting license while undergoing medical treat -
ment, recuperation, or therapy, and are in an outpatient 
status while recovering from a serious injury or illness re -
lated to the member’s military service. Applicants must 
submit a letter from your commanding officer or military 
medical doctor verifying your eligibility as a recovering 
service member, including the expected recovery date 
in your verification letter.
To prequalify, applicants must submit the document 
of eligibility along with a photocopy of your personal 
identification and GO ID by fax to (916) 419-7585 or by 
secure document upload. To upload your documenta -
tion, please email your request to LRB@wildlife.ca.gov  
and follow the link provided in the response. You may 
also apply by mail or in person at any CDFW license 
sales office. For more information please contact your 
nearest CDFW license sales offices or visit our web site 
at wildlife.ca.gov/licensing/hunting . Hunting tags and 
validations must be purchased at full price.
Upland Game Bird and California  
Duck Validation 
Any person (except junior hunters) must have an 
Upland Game Bird Validation when hunting pheasant, 
dove, turkey, quail, grouse, ptarmigan, snipe, band-
tailed pigeon, partridge or chukar. A California Duck 
Validation authorizes any person to hunt waterfowl in 
California (along with the Federal Duck Stamp and free 
HIP Validation). CDFW knows that many hunters col -
lect the physical stamps. Hunters who purchase these 
validations can claim their collectible stamp online at 
the address printed on their 2025-2026 hunting licenses. 
Stamps will be mailed at the end of the license year (af -
ter July 1, 2026). 
Harvest Information Program (HIP) 
Validation Requirement
If you plan to hunt migratory game birds in 2025-2026 
(ducks, geese, coots, dove, band-tailed pigeon, snipe, 
gallinules or black brant) you must complete a Harvest 
Information Program (HIP) survey. To take the survey you 
must request a HIP validation at any CDFW license sales 
office, license agent, or online. There is no charge for 
the HIP validation. Hunters may be cited for hunting mi -
gratory game birds without a HIP validation in their im -
mediate possession.
Duplicate Licenses
Your customer record contains a history of all your li -
cense purchases. If you lose your license or additional 
validations, you can go to any CDFW license sales of -
fice, license agent, online or by telephone sales and 
purchase a duplicate license and validations. 
Disabled Entitlements
The CDFW offers the following free disabled entitle -
ments to any resident or nonresident hunter that meets 
the qualifications. These entitlements must be certified 
by a licensed physician and submitted to the CDFW’s 
License and Revenue Branch. Hunters that qualify for 
these entitlements must also have a valid California 
hunting license in possession while hunting. 
Disabled Archer Permit 
A Disabled Archer Permit is available to any hunter who 
has permanent loss, significant limitation, or diagnosed 
disease or disorder, which substantially impairs one 
GENERAL INFORMATION
=== page 14 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
14
GENERAL INFORMATION
or both upper extremities preventing the hunter from 
drawing and holding of a bow in a firing position. The 
Disabled Archer Permit authorizes the disabled archer 
to use a crossbow or device which holds a string and 
arrow in the firing position, to assist in the taking of birds 
and mammals under the conditions of an archery tag 
or during archery season. 
Certification from a licensed physician is required. If the 
physician indicates on the initial application that the 
disability is permanent, hunters may renew the permit 
every year at any CDFW license sales office, license 
agent, online or by telephone sales. 
If the disability is temporary, the physician is required to 
enter the end date of the disability on the application. 
Temporary permits may be renewed at any CDFW’s 
license sales office, license agent, online or by tele -
phone sales every year until the temporary disability 
end date; once the end date has passed, re-certifica -
tion is required. 
Disabled Archer Permit (T14 CCR §354(j))
Upon application to the department, the department 
may issue a Disabled Archer Permit, free of any charge 
or fee, to any person with a physical disability, as 
defined in 354(k), which prevents him/her from being 
able to draw and hold a bow in a firing position. The 
Disabled Archer Permit authorizes the disabled archer 
to use a crossbow or device which holds a string and 
arrow in the firing position to assist in the taking of birds 
and mammals under the conditions of an archery tag 
or during archery season.
(1) Applications for a Disabled Archer Permit as speci -
fied in Section 702 shall be submitted to the depart -
ment at the address specified on the application 
and shall include:
(A) Applicant’s name
(B) Applicant’s physical address
(C) Applicant’s date of birth
(D) Applicant’s Driver’s License or DMV Number
(E) Applicant’s telephone number
(F) Applicant’s signature
(G) Medical Physician’s name
(H) Medical Physician’s business address
(I) Medical Physician’s business telephone number
(J) Medical Physician’s State medical license number
(K) A description of the disabled archer’s disability. The 
physician shall designate if the disability is perma -
nent or temporary. If the disability is temporary, 
shall provide date the disability is expected to end.
(L) Medical Physician’s signature
(M) Signature of the authorizing department employee 
and date issued
(2) Proof of meeting eligibility requirements may be 
met by providing a previously issued Disabled 
Archer Permit when the disability is still in effect.
(3) The valid Disabled Archer Permit shall be in the 
archer’s immediate possession while hunting and 
shall be shown on demand to any person autho -
rized to enforce this regulation.
(4) The Disabled Archer Permit is valid beginning July 
1 through June 30 of the following year or if issued 
after July 1 of the license year, it is valid beginning 
on the date issued through to the following June 
30. For any person with a permanent disability, the 
permit is valid through the end of the license year. 
A Disabled Archer Permit for a permit holder with 
a temporary disability that ends prior to the end 
of the license year is valid only through the date 
specified by his/her physician.
Disabled Muzzleloader Scope Permit
A Disabled Muzzleloader Scope Permit is available to 
any visually impaired hunter having a permanent loss, 
significant limitation, or diagnosed disease or disorder, 
which substantially impairs the vision of a hunter, 
preventing the hunter from viewing and aligning the 
sights of a muzzleloader rifle with the target in order 
to hunt deer. The Disabled Muzzleloader Scope Permit 
allows the hunter to use a 1X scope on a muzzleloader 
rifle while hunting under the conditions of a muzzleloader 
deer hunt tag. Hunters must renew the permit each 
license year, but hunters may provide a copy of their 
previously issued permit to the CDFW’s License and 
Revenue Branch to renew annually. 
Disabled Muzzleloader Scope Permit (T14 CCR §353(l))
(l) Upon application to the department, the depart -
ment may issue a Disabled Muzzleloader Scope Permit, 
free of any charge or fee, to any person with a physical 
disability, as defined in subsection (m), which prevents 
him/her from being able to focus on the target utiliz -
ing muzzleloading rifles equipped with open or “peep” 
sights. The Disabled Muzzleloader Scope Permit autho -
rizes the disabled hunter to use a 1X scope on a muzzle -
loading rifle, as described in subsection (h), with a muz -
zleloading rifle only tag.
(1) Applications for a Disabled Muzzleloader Scope 
Permit as specified in Section 702 of these regula -
tions shall be submitted to the department at the 
address specified on the application and shall 
include:
(A) Applicant’s name
(B) Applicant’s physical address
(C) Applicant’s date of birth
=== page 15 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
15
(D) Applicant’s Driver’s License or DMV Number
(E) Applicant’s telephone number
(F) Applicant’s signature
(G) Medical Physician’s or Optometrist’s name
(H) Medical Physician’s or Optometrist’s business 
address
(I) Medical Physician’s or Optometrist’s business 
telephone number
(J) Medical Physician’s State medical license number 
or Optometrist’s State license number
(K) A description of the visual disability requiring this 
permit
(L) Medical Physician’s or Optometrist’s signature
(M) Signature of the authorizing department employee 
and date issued
(2) The applicant must have a valid hunting license for 
the year for which he/she is applying.
(3) Proof of meeting eligibility requirements may be 
met by providing a previously issued Disabled 
Muzzleloader Scope Permit.
(4) The valid Disabled Muzzleloader Scope Permit shall 
be in the hunter’s immediate possession while 
hunting and shall be shown on demand to any 
person authorized to enforce this regulation.
(5) The Disabled Muzzleloader Scope Permit is valid 
from July 1 through June 30 of the following year 
or if issued after July 1 of the license year, it is 
valid beginning on the date issued through to the 
following June 30
Mobility Impaired Disabled Persons Motor 
Vehicle Hunting License 
A Mobility Impaired Disabled Persons Motor Vehicle 
Hunting License is available for any mobility impaired 
disabled hunter who must use a motor vehicle to pur -
sue game. The Mobility Impaired Disabled Persons 
Motor Vehicle Hunting License allows a hunter to dis -
charge a firearm from a vehicle that is stopped and its 
engine turned off. To qualify a person must be either 
permanently or fully confined to a wheelchair, a single 
or double amputee above the knee or double ampu -
tee below the knee, or depend upon the aid of a walk -
er, crutches, etc. to walk. Certification from a licensed 
physician is required. The license is only available from 
CDFW’s License and Revenue Branch.
Mobility Disabled Persons Motor Vehicle License (T14 
CCR §251(b)
(1) Applications. Applications for a Motor Vehicle 
Hunting License for mobility disabled persons shall 
be on a form supplied by the Department (Mobility 
Impaired Disabled Persons Motor Vehicle Hunting 
License Application, FG1460-10/95). The applica -
tion shall include the applicant’s name, address, 
physical description, a description of the qualifying 
disability, and a certified statement from a licensed 
physician describing the applicant’s permanent 
disability. It shall be unlawful for any person to falsify 
an application for a Motor Vehicle Hunting License.
(2) Terms of the License. The Motor Vehicle Hunting 
License shall specify conditions under which said 
license shall be used and shall include but not be 
limited to the following provisions:
(A) The licensee shall be accompanied by an able 
bodied assistant who shall immediately retrieve, 
and tag if necessary, all game taken. (Possession of 
the licensee’s tag, required in this subsection, shall 
not be considered an unlawful possession of a tag 
or license issued to another person).
(B) The assistant shall not possess a firearm, crossbow 
or archery equipment unless he/she is a licensed 
hunter and possesses any necessary license or tag 
for the area being hunted. The assistant shall not 
discharge a firearm or release a bolt or an arrow 
from the vehicle. If licensed, the assistant may 
dispatch wounded game which has moved out of 
range of the licensee.
(C) The vehicle must be stopped and the engine must 
be shut off prior to the licensee discharging firearm 
or releaseing a bolt from a crossbow or an arrow 
from archery equipment.
(D) The licensee shall notify the Department, at the 
regional office having responsibility for the area 
where the licensee intends to hunt, at least 48 
hours prior to hunting or contact the department’s 
24-hour dispatcher at the number indicated on the 
license. The licensee shall specify the locality, ve -
hicle description, and the approximate time frame 
during which such hunt shall take place.
(E) The licensee or assistant shall not pursue any animal 
or drive or herd animals to any other hunters with a 
motor vehicle.
(F) This license does not grant permission to trespass 
on private property or permission to use a motor 
vehicle while in any area where the use of motor 
vehicles is restricted or prohibited.
(G) This license does not grant permission to discharge 
a firearm in any place or manner that would other -
wise be unlawful, or to possess a loaded firearm in 
violation of any other city, county or state law.
(H) The licensee shall have the license in possession 
while hunting from a motor vehicle.
GENERAL INFORMATION
=== page 16 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
16
HUNTER STEWARDSHIP
Crimes Against the Public Health and 
Safety (PEN §374)
(a) Littering means the willful or negligent throwing, 
dropping, placing, depositing, or sweeping, or 
causing any such acts, of any waste matter on 
land or water in other than appropriate storage 
containers or areas designated for such purposes.
(b) Waste matter means discarded, used, or leftover 
substance including, but not limited to, a lighted or 
nonlighted cigarette, cigar, match, or any flaming 
or glowing material, or any garbage, trash, refuse, 
paper, container, packaging or construction ma-
terial, carcass of a dead animal, any nauseous or 
offensive matter of any kind, or any object likely to 
injure any person or create a traffic hazard.
Damage to property; Injuring livestock 
(FGC §2004)
It is unlawful for any person, while taking any bird, 
mammal, fish, reptile, or amphibian, to cause damage, 
or assist in causing damage, to real or personal property, 
or to leave gates or bars open, or to break down, destroy, 
or damage fences, or to tear down or scatter piles of 
rails, posts, stone, or wood, or, through carelessness or 
negligence, to injure livestock of any kind.
Illegal deposit of refuse in waters of the 
state; Presumption on abandonment of 
motor vehicle, and liability for cost of 
removal; Exceptions (FGC §5652)
(a) It is unlawful to deposit, permit to pass into, or place 
where it can pass into the waters of the state, or to 
abandon, dispose of, or throw away, within 150 feet 
of the high water mark of the waters of the state, 
any cans, bottles, garbage, motor vehicle or parts 
thereof, rubbish, litter, refuse, waste, debris, or the 
viscera or carcass of any dead mammal, or the 
carcass of any dead bird.
(b) The abandonment of any motor vehicle in any 
manner that violates this section shall constitute 
a rebuttable presumption affecting the burden 
of producing evidence that the last registered 
owner of record, not having complied with Section 
5900 of the Vehicle Code, is responsible for that 
abandonment and is thereby liable for the cost of 
removal and disposition of the vehicle. This section 
prohibits the placement of a vehicle body on 
privately owned property along a streambank by 
the property owner or tenant for the purpose of 
preventing erosion of the streambank.
(c) This section does not apply to a refuse disposal site 
that is authorized by the appropriate local agency 
having jurisdiction or to the depositing of those 
materials in a container from which the materials 
are routinely removed to a legal point of disposal.
(d) This section shall be enforced by all law 
enforcement officers of this state.
Trespassing
If the land you hunt on is not your own, it belongs to 
someone else. Make sure you have a legal right to be 
there. Contact the owner or person who administers the 
property, and secure written permission to hunt. 
Prohibition against entry upon certain 
lands for purpose of discharging firearm 
or taking or destroying mammals or 
birds (FGC §2016)
(a) It is unlawful to enter land for the purpose of 
discharging a firearm or taking or destroying a 
mammal or bird, including waterfowl, on that land, 
without having first obtained written permission 
from the owner, the owner’s agent, or the person 
in lawful possession of that land, if either of the 
following is true:
(1) The land belongs to, or is occupied by, another 
person and is either under cultivation or enclosed by 
a fence.
(2) There are signs of any size and wording forbidding 
trespass or hunting or both displayed along all 
exterior boundaries of the land, at intervals not 
less than three to the mile, and at all roads and 
trails entering the land, including land temporarily 
inundated by non-navigable waters flowing outside 
the established banks of a river, stream, slough, 
or other waterway, which fairly advise a person 
about to enter the land that the use of the land is so 
restricted.
(b) Nothing in this section restricts the right of the public 
to use navigable waters for hunting, fishing, or other 
public purpose as guaranteed under Section IV of 
Hunter Stewardship
=== page 17 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
17
HUNTING AND OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE RECREATION
Rider Licensing
A driver’s license is not required for adult riders, but 
a person with a suspended or revoked license may 
not operate any motor vehicle, including an ATV (VC 
14601(a)). 
Riders under 18 years old must have completed an ATV 
safety course and have a certificate of completion in 
their possession while riding (VC 38503) or be supervised 
by an adult with an ATV safety certificate. 
Riders under 14 must also have direct supervision by an 
adult (VC 38504). 
Parents of youth riders who permit them to ride without a 
safety certificate may also be cited (VC 38504.1). 
ATV safety courses may be obtained by calling ASI at 
800-887-2887, and motorcycle safety courses may be 
obtained through the Motorcycle Safety Foundation’s 
Dirt Bike School at 877-288-7093.
Vehicle Registration
All OHV’s that are transported on the highway or parked 
or operated on public land must be registered through 
DMV (VC 38020). 
Vehicles may be issued either a “green sticker” or a 
“red sticker.” Red sticker vehicles may only be operated 
during certain times of the year in some locations (CCR 
T13-2412(f)). 
Current Red Sticker riding seasons can be found on 
the California State Parks Off-Highway Motor Vehicle 
Recreation Division website at www.ohv.parks.ca.gov. 
You will need to purchase a special “Non-Resident OHV 
Permit” if you are not a California resident AND your off-
highway vehicle or snowmobile is not registered in your 
home state. For more information and to find out where 
these Non-Resident OHV Permits can be purchased and 
to get more information on the program, please see 
the California State Parks Off-Highway Motor Vehicle 
Recreation Division (OHMVR Division) website at https://
ohv.parks.ca.gov/
Equipment
No person shall use, operate, or allow to be used or 
operated, any off highway motor vehicle on any forest-
covered land, brush-covered land, or grass- covered 
land unless the vehicle is equipped with a spark arrester 
maintained in effective working order (VC 38335(a)).
OHV’s also must have a working muffler (VC 38365(a)) 
and brake system (VC 38335(a)). A headlight and taillight 
are required for night time operation (VC 38335/38345).
Operation
The operator of an off-highway motor vehicle shall be 
able to reach and operate all controls necessary to 
safely operate the vehicle (VC 38304). 
No person shall operate, ride, or be otherwise propelled 
on an all-terrain vehicle on public lands unless the person 
wears a safety helmet meeting requirements es- tablished 
for motorcycles and motorized bicycles (VC 38505). 
No operator of an all-terrain vehicle may carry a 
passenger when operating on public lands, unless the 
ATV is designed to carry a pas- senger (VC 38506). 
It is also unlawful to ride in the bed of a pickup truck, 
unless the bed is equipped with seats and safety belts 
(VC 21712). 
The speed limit is 15 mph for ATV’s and motorcycles when 
operated within 50 feet of a campground, campsite, or 
congregation of people or animals (VC 38305). 
ATV’s may not be ridden at any speed that is unsafe for 
the conditions. It is illegal to operate an ATV in a wilderness 
area (FGC 10740 or VC 38301.3) or any other closed area 
(VC 38301), or in a manner likely to cause damage to 
land, wildlife habitat, or vegetation (VC 38319).
Alcohol
Laws concerning alcohol and ATV’s reflect alcohol laws 
for regular motor vehicles. The same standard for driving 
under the influence of alcohol applies when riding an 
ATV (VC 23152). Also, open containers of alcohol are not 
permitted on ATV’s and alcohol must be transported in a 
locked container (VC 23225(a) (3)).
Firearms
It is illegal to possess a loaded firearm on an ATV while 
on a public road or other way open to the public (FGC 
2006). It is illegal to shoot at game from an ATV (FGC 
3002) or to shoot from a public roadway (PC 374c).
Information about off-highway motor vehicle laws and 
riding opportunities can be found online at www.ohv.
parks.ca.gov or at 916-324-4442.
Hunting and Off Highway Vehicle Recreation
=== page 18 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
18
HUNTER EDUCATION
Hunter Education Fee
Hunter Education Certificate (Duplicate)
Customers with CDFW verified Hunter Education Certificates in their ALDS customer re-
cord may purchase duplicate hunter education certificates at license agents or online. 
$9.21
Hunter Education Equivalency Exam
Available at regional CDFW license sales offices only by appointment. NOTE: Not recog-
nized as proof of Hunter Education.
$71.50
Class Options
Hunter education classes include instruction in firearms 
safety and handling, sportsmanship and ethics, wildlife 
management and conservation, archery, black powder, 
wildlife identification, game care, first aid, and survival. 
Classes are offered in three formats:
1. Traditional (minimum of 10 hours of classroom, 
homework, and field instruction) or
2. Online course and follow-up class. For more 
information or to register for a class, visit wildlife.
ca.gov/Hunter-Education.
Hunter Education Equivalency Exams
Hunter education equivalency exams are given by 
appointment only at CDFW regional offices for a fee. In 
some states, the California equivalency certificate may 
not be accepted as evidence of hunter education. For 
more information on the hunter education equivalency 
exam, contact your nearest CDFW regional office.
Duplicate Hunter Education Certificates
Duplicate hunter education certificates can be issued 
to any person who completed and passed a hunter 
education class. If the class was completed prior to 
1989, CDFW does not have records before this date; 
the hunter should contact the original instructor, club, or 
organization where the course was taught to obtain a 
duplicate. If the hunter is unable to obtain a duplicate 
through these means, they will have to repeat the course. 
Visit the hunter education web page at wildlife.ca.gov/
Hunter-Education for more information.
Advanced Hunter Education
Advanced Hunter Education Clinics are species-specific 
or skill-specific. Learn how to field dress a deer, call in a 
mallard, find your way out of the woods, process and 
prepare your game for the table, plus much more! 
Upcoming Clinics include:
• Hunting with Air Guns
• Wild Pig Hunting
• Introduction to Archery/Bowhunting (Family Friendly)
• Long Range Shooting
• Wild Turkey Hunting
For additional information, including clinic dates and 
locations, visit wildlife.ca.gov/Hunter-Education/
Advanced.
Bow Hunter Education Class
Although bow hunter education training is not required 
in California, many states do require it for all bow hunters. 
CDFW’s bow hunter education program meets the 
requirements of all states. For more information or to 
register for a class, visit wildlife.ca.gov/Hunter-Education.
Kendyl R.
Hunter Education
=== page 19 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
19
FREE HUNTING DAYS
California Free Hunting Days (T14 CCR 
§700.1)
(a) Definitions:
(1) “Free Hunting Day Registration” is a no-fee license 
available only to an authorized unlicensed hunter for use 
on the two designated free hunting days of the license 
year for which the registration is issued.
(2) “Authorized Unlicensed Hunter” is a California resident 
who holds a free hunting day registration.
(3) “Licensed Supervising Hunter” is a hunter accompa -
nying an authorized unlicensed hunter who holds a valid 
California hunting license and is at least 21 years old.
(b) An authorized unlicensed hunter shall be eligible to 
participate in free hunting days for only one license year 
and shall not be eligible to obtain a free hunting day 
registration for any other license year.
(c) The department shall issue a free hunting day 
registration to hunt on free hunting days to any California 
resident who submits to the department all information 
required to obtain an annual California hunting license 
pursuant to sections 700.3 and 700.4 and provides 
evidence of completing a course in hunter education as 
required in paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of Fish and 
Game Code Section 3050.
(d) Authorized unlicensed hunters must have in their 
possession while hunting: a free hunting day registration 
for the current license year, any required tags, validations, 
report cards, federal entitlements and any required entry 
permits, with the exception of upland game bird hunting 
validations and state duck hunting validations.
(e) Authorized unlicensed hunters participating in free 
hunting days shall take only upland and migratory game 
birds as defined in sections 300 and 502; resident small 
game as defined in Section 257; furbearing mammals as 
defined in Fish and Game Code Section 4000; nongame 
mammals as defined in Section 472; and wild pigs as 
defined in Fish and Game Code Section 4650.
(f) Authorized unlicensed hunters hunting pursuant to this 
section are subject to all requirements, limitations, re -
strictions, conditions, statutes, rules, and regulations ap -
plicable to the holder of a valid hunting license, except 
as described in subdivision (g) of Fish and Game Code 
Section 3040.
(g) A free hunting day registration, as used by an 
authorized unlicensed hunter participating in free 
hunting days, does not authorize the possessor to apply 
for any drawing for any tag, reservation, or other hunting 
opportunity where an annual hunting license is required 
to apply.
(h) An authorized unlicensed hunter must be accom-
panied by a licensed supervising hunter, with the 
following conditions:
(1) A licensed supervising hunter must only accompany 
one authorized unlicensed hunter.
(2) While engaged in hunting activities, the authorized 
unlicensed hunter and the licensed supervising hunter 
shall remain in close visual and verbal contact with each 
other at all times. The licensed supervising hunter must 
be able to provide adequate direction and immediately 
assume control of a firearm or other legal method of 
take used by the authorized unlicensed hunter, to ensure 
safety and compliance with laws and regulations at all 
times, as specified in Fish and Game Code 3040.
(i) Annual free hunting dates will be designated by the 
director and published in annual publications of the 
department regarding current hunting regulations, as 
specified in Fish and Game Code 3040.
Free Hunting Days
=== page 20 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
20
Powers Delegated to the Commission 
(FGC §200)
(a) There is hereby delegated to the commission the 
power to regulate the taking or possession of birds, 
mammals, fish, amphibians, and reptiles.
(b) No power is delegated to the commission by this sec-
tion to regulate either of the following:
(1) The taking, possessing, processing, or use of fish, am -
phibians, kelp, or other aquatic plants for commercial 
purposes.
(2) The taking or possession of a spike buck or spotted 
fawn. “Spotted fawn” means a deer one year of age 
or less that has spotted pelage. “Spike buck” means a 
male deer with unbranched antlers on both sides that 
are more than three inches in length.
(c) This section and any regulations adopted pursuant to 
this section have no effect on any provision of this code 
or any regulation adopted pursuant to this code that re-
lates to a matter described in paragraph (1) of subdivi -
sion (b).
Regulations as to birds and mammals; 
Scope and application (FGC §203)
Any regulation of the commission pursuant to this article 
relating to resident game birds, game mammals and fur-
bearing mammals may apply to all or any areas, districts, 
or portions thereof, at the discretion of the commission, 
and may do any or all of the following as to any or all 
species or subspecies:
(a) Establish, extend, shorten, or abolish open seasons 
and closed seasons.
(b) Establish, change, or abolish bag limits and 
possession limits.
(c) Establish and change areas or territorial limits for their 
taking.
(d) Prescribe the manner and the means of taking.
(e) Establish, change, or abolish restrictions based upon 
sex, maturity, or other physical distinctions.
Adoption, amendment, or repeal of 
regulation; Meetings (FGC §255)
(a) When adopting, amending, or repealing a 
regulation governed by this article, the commission 
shall conduct the following steps at separate public 
meetings:
(1) Approve the submission of a notice of proposed 
action to the Office of Administrative Law.
(2) Consider public comment on the proposed action. 
The department shall participate in this process by 
reviewing and responding to all public comment.
(3) Make a final decision on the proposed action.
(b) The meetings required by this section may be regular 
or special meetings.
(c) The meetings required by this section shall be duly no-
ticed to the public in accordance with subdivision (c) 
of Section 110 and the Administrative Procedure Act 
(Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 11340) of Part 
1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code).
(d) Within 45 days after the commission makes a final 
decision to adopt, amend, or repeal a regulation 
governed by this article, the department shall 
publish and distribute the regulation to each county 
clerk, district attorney, and judge of the superior 
court in the state.
Hierarchy of Rules in California:  
Fish and Game
California Constitution
• Article IV, Section 20(a) states that the Legislature 
may provide for division of the State into fish and 
game districts and may protect fish and game in 
districts or parts of districts.
• Section 20(b) provides that there is a Fish and Game 
Commission of 5 members appointed by the Governor 
and approved by the Senate for 6-year terms. 
• In addition, the Legislature may delegate to the 
commission such powers relating to the protec-
tion and propagation of fish and game as the 
Legislature sees fit. 
• Finally, a member of the commission may be removed 
by concurrent resolution adopted by each house.
California Statutory Codes
• Fish and Game Code Division 1, Chapter 1 concerns 
the organization of the Commission. 
• Section 101 provides there is in the Resources 
Agency the Fish and Game Commission that is cre-
ated by Article IV, Section 20.
• In addition, Public Resources Code Division 20, 
Chapter 5, Article 2, Section 30411 provides that the 
Department of Fish and Wildlife and the Fish and 
Game Commission are the principal state agencies 
responsible for the establishment and control of wild-
life and fishery management programs.
California Code of Regulations
• California Code of Regulations, Title 14, contains 
regulations promulgated by the Fish and Game 
Commission and the Department of Fish and Wildlife.
• Subdivision 1: Fish, Amphibians, and Reptiles
• Subdivision 2: Game, Furbearers, Nongame, and 
Depredators
• Subdivision 3: General Regulations
AUTHORITY OF THE COMMISSION
Authority of the Commission
=== page 21 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
21
Code Definitions Reaffirmed (FGC §255)
Words defined by sections 8, 9, 10, 11, 18, 22, 29, and 30 
through 88 inclusive of the Fish and Game Code have 
had and shall have the same meaning, definition and 
scope whenever used in division 1 of title 14, California 
Code of Regulations, it being the intent of the Fish and 
Game Commission in adopting the orders, rules, and reg-
ulations set forth in said division that the provisions of said 
sections were and are applicable. 
Definition of “Take” (FGC §86)
To hunt, pursue, catch, capture or kill or attempt to hunt, 
pursue, catch, capture or kill.
Bag Limit (FGC §18)
“Bag limit” means the maximum limit, in number or 
amount, of birds, mammals, fish, reptiles, or amphibians 
that may lawfully be taken by one person during a speci-
fied period of time. 
Possession Limit (FGC §19)
“Possession limit” means the maximum, in number or 
amount, of birds, mammals, fish, reptiles, or amphibians 
that may be lawfully possessed by one person. 
Closed Season (FGC §29)
“Closed season” means that period of time during which 
the taking of birds, mammals, fish, amphibians, or rep -
tiles, is prohibited.
Mammal (FGC §54)
“Mammal” means a wild or feral mammal or part of a 
wild or feral animal, but not a wild, feral, or undomesti -
cated burro.
Open Season (FGC §62)
“Open season” means that period of time during which 
the taking of birds, mammals, fish, reptiles, or amphibians 
is allowed as prescribed in this code and regulations ad-
opted by the commission. If used to define the period of 
time during which take is allowed “season” means “open 
season.”
Bag and Possession Limit Defined (T14 
CCR §252)
“Bag and possession limit” means the daily bag limit of 
each kind of resident and migratory game birds, game 
mammals, exotic game mammals, and furbearing mam-
mals which may be taken and possessed by any one 
person unless otherwise authorized. 
Season Defined (T14 CCR §258)
“Season” means that period of time during which resi -
dent and migratory game birds, game mammals, exotic 
game mammals, and fur-bearing mammals may be tak-
en. All dates are inclusive.
Big Game Defined (T14 CCR §350)
“Big game” means the following: deer (genus 
Odocoileus), elk (genus Cervus), pronghorn antelope 
(genus Antilocarpa), black bear (genus Ursus) and Nelson 
bighorn sheep (subspecies Ovis canadensis nelsoni) in 
the areas described in subsection 4902(b) of the Fish and 
Game Code.
Methods of Taking (FGC §3001)
It is unlawful to take birds or mammals with firearms, BB 
devices as defined in Section 16250 of the Penal Code, 
crossbows, or with bow and arrow when intoxicated.
Methods Authorized for Taking Big 
Game (T14 CCR §353)
(a) It shall be unlawful to take or attempt to take big 
game in violation of this section or Section 250.1. The 
take or attempted take of any big game (as defined by 
Section 350 of these regulations) with a firearm shall be in 
accordance with the use of nonlead projectiles and am-
munition pursuant to Section 250.1 of these regulations.
(b) Definition. For purposes of this section, a projectile 
is any bullet, ball, sabot, slug, buckshot or other device 
which is expelled from a firearm through a barrel by 
force. The following definitions shall apply:
(1) A softnose or expanding projectile is a bullet designed 
to increase from its original diameter, commonly referred 
to as “mushrooming”, and retain a significant part of 
its original weight upon impact with, or when passing 
through the tissues of an animal.
(2) Projectiles commonly referred to as “frangible” bul -
lets, designed to disintegrate upon impact with, or when 
passing through the tissues of an animal are not softnose 
or expanding projectiles.
(c) Except for the provisions of the following subsections 
(d) through (j), big game may only be taken by rifles us -
ing centerfire cartridges with softnose or expanding pro -
jectiles; bow and arrow (see Section 354 of these regula-
tions for archery equipment regulations); or wheellock, 
matchlock, flintlock or percussion type, including “in-line” 
muzzleloading rifles using black powder or equivalent 
black powder substitute, including pellets, with a single 
projectile loaded from the muzzle and at least .40 caliber 
in designation.
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
General Provisions and Defintions
=== page 22 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
22
(d) Shotguns capable of holding not more than three 
shells firing single slugs may be used for the taking of 
deer, and bear. In areas where the discharge of rifles or 
shotguns with slugs is prohibited by county ordinance, 
shotguns capable of holding not more than three shells 
firing size 0 or 00 buckshot may be used for the taking of 
deer only.
(e) Pistols and revolvers using centerfire cartridges with 
softnose or expanding projectiles may be used to take 
deer and bear.
(f) Pistols and revolvers with minimum barrel lengths of 
4 inches, using centerfire cartridges with softnose or ex -
panding projectiles may be used to take elk and bighorn 
sheep.
(g) Except as provided in subsection 354(j) of these regu-
lations, crossbows may be used to take deer only during 
the regular seasons.
(h) Under the provisions of a muzzleloading rifle only 
tag, hunters may only possess muzzleloading rifles as de -
scribed in subsection (c) equipped with open or “peep” 
type sights only except as described in subsection (l).
(i) Under the provisions of a muzzleloading rifle/archery 
tag, hunters may only possess muzzleloading rifles with 
sights as described in subsection (h); archery equipment 
as described in Section 354 of these regulations; or both. 
For purposes of this subsection, archery equipment does 
not include crossbows, except as provided in subsection 
354(j) of these regulations.
(j) Except as otherwise provided, while taking or attempt-
ing to take big game under the provisions of this section 
or Section 354 of these regulations it is unlawful to use 
any device or devices which: 1) throw, cast or project 
an artificial light or electronically alter or intensify a light 
source for the purpose of visibly enhancing an animal; or 
2) throw, cast or project an artificial light or electronically 
alter or intensify a light source for the purpose of providing 
a visible point of aim directly on an animal. Devices com-
monly referred to as “sniperscopes”, night vision scopes 
or binoculars, or those utilizing infra-red, heat sensing or 
other non-visible spectrum light technology used for the 
purpose of visibly enhancing an animal or providing a 
visible point of aim directly on an animal are prohibited 
and may not be possessed while taking or attempting 
to take big game. Devices commonly referred to as la -
ser rangefinders, “red-dot” scopes with self-illuminating 
reticles, and fiberoptic sights with self-illuminating sight 
or pins which do not throw, cast or project a visible light 
onto an animal are permitted.
(k) Unless provided in these regulations or any other law, 
it is unlawful to possess a loaded muzzleloading firearm 
in any vehicle or conveyance or its attachments which 
is standing on or along or is being driven on or along any 
public road or highway or other way open to the public.
For the purposes of this section, a muzzleloading firearm 
shall be deemed to be loaded when it is capped or 
primed or has an electronic or other ignition device at -
tached and has a powder charge and projectile or shot 
in the barrel or cylinder.
Archery Equipment and Crossbow 
Regulations (T14 CCR §354)
(a) Bow means any device consisting of a flexible mate -
rial having a string connecting its two ends and used to 
propel an arrow held in firing position by hand only. Bow 
includes long bow, recurve, or compound bow.
(b) Crossbow means any device consisting of a bow or 
cured latex band or other flexible material (commonly 
referred to as a linear bow) affixed to a stock, or any bow 
that utilizes any device attached directly or indirectly to 
the bow for the purpose of keeping a crossbow bolt, an 
arrow, or the string in firing position. 
Except as provided in subsection 354(j) for Disabled 
Archer Permits, a crossbow is not archery equipment and 
cannot be used during the archery deer season.
(c) For the taking of big game, hunting arrows and cross-
bow bolts with a broad head type blade which will not 
pass through a hole seven-eighths inch in diameter shall 
be used. Mechanical/retractable broad heads shall be 
measured in the open position. For the taking of migra -
tory game birds, resident small game, furbearers and 
nongame mammals and birds any arrow or crossbow 
bolt may be used except as prohibited by subsection (d) 
below. Notwithstanding the general prohibition of the 
use of lights in Fish and Game Code section 2005, arrows 
or crossbow bolts with lighted nocks that do not emit a 
directional beam of light may be used.
(d) No arrows or crossbow bolt with an explosive head or 
with any substance which would tranquilize or poison any 
animal may be used. No arrows or crossbow bolt without 
flu-flu fletching may be used for the take of pheasants 
and migratory game birds, except for provisions of sec -
tion 507(a)(2).
(e) No arrow or crossbow bolt may be released from a 
bow or crossbow upon or across any highway, road or 
other way open to vehicular traffic.
(f) It shall be unlawful to use any bow or crossbow with -
out a draw weight of at least 30 pounds for a bow or 125 
pounds for a cross bow.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
=== page 23 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
23
General Prohibition Against Taking 
Resident Game Birds, Game Mammals, 
Exotic Game Mammals and Furbearing 
Mammals (T14 CCR §250)
Except as otherwise provided in this Title 14, and in 
the Fish and Game Code, resident game birds, game 
mammals, exotic game mammals, and furbearing 
mammals may not be taken at any time. 
Restrictions Relating to Short-Barreled 
Rifle or Short-Barreled Shotgun (PEN 
§33210)
Except as expressly provided in Sections 33215 to 33225, 
inclusive, and in Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 
17700) of Division 2 of Title 2, and solely in accordance 
with those provisions, no person may manufacture, im -
port into this state, keep for sale, offer for sale, give, lend, 
or possess any short-barreled rifle or short-barreled shot -
gun. Nothing else in any provision listed in Section 16580 
shall be construed as authorizing the manufacture, im -
portation into the state, keeping for sale, offering for sale, 
or giving, lending, or possession of any short-barreled rifle 
or short-barreled shotgun. 
Use or possession of a shotgun (FGC 
§2010)
(a) It is unlawful to use or possess a shotgun larger than 
10-gauge, or to use or possess a shotgun capable of 
holding more than six cartridges at one time, to take a 
mammal or bird.
(b) A shotgun that has been modified with the insertion 
of a plug is deemed, for the purpose of this section, to 
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Interested in the chance to be featured in 
CDFW outreach or publication materials? 
Submit your photos by scanning this 
code or clicking here! 
TAKE YOUR SHOT!
Only photos following CDFW’s 
photo submission guidelines 
can be considered for use.
INTERSTATE WILDLIFE  
VIOLATOR COMPACT
The Interstate Wildlife Violator Compact 
(IWVC) is an agreement between all 50 
states and the District of Columbia, which 
allows for the reciprocal recognition of 
hunting, fishing and trapping license 
suspensions. If your license privileges 
have been suspended by another state, 
the suspension may be recognized here 
in California. For example, if your sport 
fishing, hunting or trapping privileges 
have been suspended in Colorado for 
five years, your privileges may also be 
suspended for five years in California 
or any of the states participating in the 
IWVC. The purchase of licenses or tags 
during the term of the suspension is a 
violation of the law and may result in 
prosecution.
=== page 24 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
24
GENERAL PROVISIONS
have a cartridge capacity equal to the number of car -
tridges that can be loaded into the weapon as modified.
(c) After a public hearing, the commission may adopt 
regulations relative to the ammunition capacity of shot -
guns for taking mammals or birds that are more restrictive 
than the limits provided in subdivision (a), or that it deter-
mines may be needed to conform to federal law.
California Constitution
Shooting Time (T14 CCR §250.5)
In these orders whenever a specific clock time is men -
tioned, such time is meant to be legal California time for 
the date specified: i.e., during the days when California 
is on Pacific Daylight Saving Time, Pacific Daylight Saving 
Time is intended; when California is legally on Pacific 
Standard Time, Pacific Standard Time is intended. When 
reference is made to sunrise or sunset time, such refer -
ence is to the sunrise or sunset time at the location of the 
hunter.
Discharge of firearms within specified 
distance of buildings; Exceptions (FGC 
§3004)
(a) It is unlawful for a person, other than the owner, 
person in possession of the premises, or a person 
having the express permission of the owner or 
person in possession of the premises, while within 150 
yards of an occupied dwelling house, residence, or 
other building, or within 150 yards of a barn or other 
outbuilding used in connection with an occupied 
dwelling house, residence, or other building, to 
either hunt or discharge a firearm or other deadly 
weapon while hunting. The 150-yard area is a 
“safety zone.”
(b) It is unlawful for a person to intentionally discharge a 
firearm or release an arrow or crossbow bolt over or 
across a public road or other established way open 
to the public in an unsafe and reckless manner
Possession of loaded rifle or shotgun in 
vehicle; Exceptions (FGC §2006)
(a) It is unlawful to possess a loaded rifle or shotgun in 
any vehicle or conveyance or its attachments which 
is standing on or along or is being driven on or along 
any public highway or other way open to the public.
(b) A rifle or shotgun shall be deemed to be loaded for 
the purposes of this section when there is an un-
expended cartridge or shell in the firing chamber 
but not when the only cartridges or shells are in the 
magazine.
(c) The provisions of this section shall not apply to peace 
officers or members of the Armed Forces of this state 
or the United States, while on duty or going to or 
returning from duty.
Shooting from specified vehicle (FGC 
§3002)
It is unlawful to shoot at any game bird or mammal, in -
cluding a marine mammal as defined in Section 4500, 
from a powerboat, sailboat, motor vehicle, or airplane.
Prohibition on Pursuing or Shooting Birds 
and Mammals from Motor-Driven Air or 
Land Vehicles, Motorboats, Airboats, 
Sailboats or Snowmobiles (T14 CCR 
§251)
(a) General Prohibition
No person shall pursue, drive, herd, or take any bird or 
mammal from any type of motor-driven air or land ve -
hicles, motorboat, airboat, sailboat, or snowmobile. 
Additionally, no person shall use any motorized, hot-air, 
or unpowered aircraft or other device capable of flight 
or any earth orbiting imaging device to locate or assist in 
locating big game mammals beginning 48 hours before 
and continuing until 48 hours after any big game hunting 
season in the same area. No person shall use at any time 
or place, without Department approval, any computer, 
telemetry device or other equipment to locate a big 
game mammal to which a tracking device is attached. 
For purposes of this subsection “use” includes but is not 
limited to personal use or intent by another to obtain in -
formation from such personal use. Evidence of an act 
constituting a violation of this section includes but is not 
limited to flying slowly at low attitudes, hovering, circling 
or repeatedly flying over any area where big game may 
be found. Exceptions to this subsection are:
(1) When the motor of such motorboat, airboat, or 
sailboat has been shut off and/or the sails furled and 
its progress therefrom has ceased, and it is drifting, 
beached, moored, resting at anchor, or is being 
propelled by paddle, oar or pole.
(2) When used by the landowner or tenant of private 
property to drive or herd game mammals for the 
purpose of preventing damage to private property.
(3) Pursuant to a license from the department issued 
under such regulations as the commission may pre-
scribe (see subsection 251(b) below).
Harassment of Animals (T14 CCR §251.1)
Except as otherwise authorized in these regulations or in 
the Fish and Game Code, no person shall harass, herd or 
drive any game or nongame bird or mammal or furbear-
ing mammal. For the purposes of this section, harass is 
=== page 25 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
25
defined as an intentional act which disrupts an animal’s 
normal behavior patterns, which includes, but is not lim -
ited to, breeding, feeding or sheltering. This section does 
not apply to a landowner or tenant who drives or herds 
birds or mammals for the purpose of preventing damage 
to private or public property, including aquaculture and 
agriculture crops.
Prohibition Against Feeding Big Game 
Mammals (T14 CCR §251.3)
No person shall knowingly feed big game mammals, as 
defined in Section 350 of these regulations
Game Birds, Game Mammals, Exotic 
Game Mammals, Furbearers and 
Nongame Animals, Possession Of (T14 
CCR §251.5)
(a) Migratory game birds may not be held beyond the 
period provided by the federal regulations and in 
accordance with the daily bag and possession limits 
prescribed by these regulations. (see sections 257 
and 502).
(b) Live mountain lions may be possessed only under 
terms of a permit issued by the Department pursu-
ant to section 2150 of the Fish and Game Code or if 
the owner can demonstrate that the mountain lion 
was in his/ her possession on or before June 6, 1990 
under a permit issued pursuant to section 3200 of 
said code. 
(c) Every game bird, game mammal, exotic game 
mammal, furbearer or nongame animal taken 
under the authority of a hunting or trapping license 
and reduced to possession by the hunter or trapper 
shall be immediately killed and become a part of 
the daily bag limit. 
Prohibition Against Taking Resident 
Game Birds, Game Mammals, and 
Exotic Game Mammals by the Aid of 
Bait (T14 CCR §257.5)
Except as otherwise provided in these regulations or in 
the Fish and Game Code, resident game birds, game 
mammals, and exotic game mammals, may not be tak -
en within 400 yards of any baited area. 
(a) Definition of Baited Area 
As used in this regulation, “baited area” shall mean any 
area where shelled, shucked or unshucked corn, wheat 
or other grains, salt, or other feed whatsoever capable 
of luring, attracting, or enticing such birds or mammals is 
directly or indirectly placed, exposed, deposited, distrib-
uted, or scattered, and such area shall remain a baited 
GENERAL PROVISIONS
area for ten days following complete removal of all such 
corn, wheat or other grains, salt, or other feed. 
(b) Exceptions
(1) The taking of domestically reared and released 
game birds on licensed pheasant clubs and other 
licensed game bird clubs;
(2) The taking of resident game birds, game mammals, 
and exotic game mammals on or over standing 
crops, flooded standing crops (including aquatics), 
flooded harvested croplands, grain crops properly 
shocked on the field where grown, or grains found 
scattered solely as the result of normal agricultural 
planting or harvesting;
(3) The taking of resident game birds and mammals on 
or over any lands where shelled, shucked or un-
shucked corn, wheat or other grain, salt, or other 
feed have been distributed or scattered as the result 
of bona fide agricultural operations or procedures, 
or as a result of manipulation of a crop or other feed 
on the land where grown for wildlife management 
purposes: provided that manipulation for wildlife 
management purposes does not include the dis-
tributing or scattering of grain or other feed once it 
has been removed from or stored on the field where 
grown.
Unlawful sale or purchase of bird or 
animal; Exceptions; Civil liability (FGC 
§3039)
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, Section 
2023, Section 3087, Section 4303, another provision 
of this code, or a regulation adopted pursuant to 
this code, it is unlawful to sell or purchase a bird or 
mammal found in the wild in California.
(b) Shed antlers, or antlers taken from domestically 
reared animals that have been manufactured into 
products or handicraft items, or that have been 
cut into blocks or units that are to be handcrafted 
or manufactured into those articles, may be pur-
chased or sold at any time. However, complete 
antlers, whole heads with antlers, antlers that are 
mounted for display, or antlers in velvet may not be 
sold or purchased at any time, except as authorized 
by Section 3087.
(c) Notwithstanding Section 3504, inedible parts of 
domestically raised game birds may be sold or pur-
chased at any time.
(d) A person who illegally takes a bird or mammal for 
profit or for personal gain by engaging in an activity 
authorized by this section is subject to civil liability 
pursuant to Section 2582.
=== page 26 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
26
GEOGRAPHIC PROVISIONS
Prohibition Against Taking Other Than 
Migratory Game Birds and Quail in 
Picacho State Recreation Area (T14 
CCR §260)
Notwithstanding any other provisions of these regulations, 
in Picacho State Recreation Area only migratory game 
birds and quail may be taken or possessed as prescribed 
in Sections 301, 500, 501 and 502 of these regulations.
Prohibition Against Hunting Other 
Than During September-January on 
Providence Mountains State Recreation 
Area (T14 CCR §260.1)
Notwithstanding any other provisions of these regula -
tions, in Providence Mountains State Recreation Area 
hunting is permitted only during the period September 1 
to January 31.
Hunting Restrictions on Lake Oroville 
State Recreation Area (T14 CCR §260.2)
Game species may be taken on the Lake Oroville State 
Recreation Area only as follows:
(a) No hunting of any type is permitted between 
February 1 and September 14 except for wild turkeys 
only, during the spring turkey hunting season as pro-
vided in Section 306 of these regulations.
(b) No waterfowl or deer hunting is permitted at any time.
(c) Game species may be taken only during their 
respective open seasons or portions thereof falling 
within the period September 15 through January 
31; and as provided in (a) above; and as otherwise 
provided by state Parks and Recreation area regu-
lations (see area regulations).
Prohibition Against Taking Other Than 
Waterfowl and Resident Small Game on 
Perris Reservoir State Recreation Area 
(T14 CCR §260.4)
Notwithstanding any other provision of these regulations, 
in Perris Reservoir State Recreation Area only waterfowl 
and resident small game may be taken or possessed as 
prescribed in Section 551 of these regulations.
Prohibition Against Night Hunting (T14 
CCR §263)
Notwithstanding any other provisions of these regula -
tions, hunting wildlife from one-half hour after sunset to 
one-half hour before sunrise is prohibited in Monterey 
and San Benito counties east of Highway 101.
Prohibition of Rifles and Pistols in 
Picacho and Providence Mountains 
State Recreation Areas (T14 CCR §311.6)
The use of rifles and pistols to take any bird or mammal is 
prohibited in Picacho and Providence Mountains State 
Recreation Areas.
Acts unlawful in a refuge (FGC §10500)
Except under a permit or specific authorization, it is un -
lawful to do any of the following:
(a) To take or possess a bird or mammal in a game 
refuge.
(b) To use or have in possession in a game refuge, a 
firearm, BB device as defined in Section 16250 of the 
Penal Code, crossbow, bow and arrow, or a trap 
or other contrivance designed to be, or capable of 
being, used to take birds or mammals, or to dis-
charge a firearm or BB device or to release an arrow 
or crossbow bolt into a game refuge.
(c) To take or possess a fish or amphibian in a fish ref-
uge, or to use or have in possession in that refuge a 
contrivance designed to be used for catching fish.
(d) To take or possess a bird, discharge a firearm or BB 
device, or release an arrow or crossbow bolt, within 
or into a waterfowl refuge.
(e) To take or possess a quail in a quail refuge.
(f) To take or possess an invertebrate or specimen of 
marine plant life in a marine life refuge.
(g) To take or possess a clam or an instrument or appa-
ratus capable of being used to dig clams in a clam 
refuge.
Possession of firearms, BB devices, 
crossbows and bolts, or bows and 
arrows when traveling through a game 
refuge; Notice to department (FGC 
§10506)
Nothing in this code prohibits the possession of firearms, 
BB devices as defined in Section 16250 of the Penal 
Code, crossbows and bolts, or bows and arrows by per -
sons when traveling through any game refuges when the 
firearms are taken apart or encased and unloaded and 
the bows are unstrung or stored separately from any ar -
row or bolt. When the traveling is done on a route other 
than a public highway or other public thoroughfare or 
right of way, notice shall be given to the department at 
least 24 hours before that traveling. The notice shall give 
the name and address of the person intending to travel 
through the refuge, the name of the refuge, the approxi-
mate route, and the approximate time when that person 
intends to travel through the refuge.
Geographic Provisions
=== page 27 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
27
For more information and to view 
the list of certified ammunition, 
please see the CDFW Certified 
Nonlead Ammunition Webpage: 
https://wildlife.ca.gov/Hunting/
Nonlead-Ammunition/Certified
USE OF NONLEAD AMMO
Prohibition on the Use of Lead Projectiles 
and Ammunition Using Lead Projectiles 
for the Take of Wildlife (T14 CCR §250.1)
(b) Definitions
(1) A projectile is any bullet, ball, sabot, slug, buckshot, 
shot, pellet or other device that is expelled from a 
firearm through a barrel by force.
(2) Nonlead ammunition is any centerfire, shotgun, 
muzzleloading, or rimfire ammunition containing 
projectiles certified pursuant to subsection (b)(3) or 
subsection (f).
(3) Shotgun ammunition containing pellets composed 
of materials approved as nontoxic by the U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service, as identified in Section 507.1 of 
these regulations, is considered certified.
(4) A nonlead projectile shall contain no more than one 
percent lead by weight, as certified pursuant to 
subsection (b)(3) or subsection (f).
(c) General Provisions
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is 
unlawful to possess any projectile containing lead in 
excess of the amount allowed in subsection (b)(4) 
and a firearm capable of firing the projectile while 
taking or attempting to take wildlife.
(2) The possession of a projectile containing lead in 
excess of the amount allowed in subsection (b)(4) 
without possessing a firearm capable of firing the 
projectile is not a violation of this section.
(3) Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit the 
possession of concealable firearms containing lead 
ammunition, provided that the firearm is possessed 
for personal protection and is not used to take or 
assist in the take of wildlife.
Nontoxic Shot Requirement for 
Waterfowl, American Coot and 
Common Moorhen Hunting.(T14 CCR 
§507.1)
Notwithstanding any other provision of these regulations, 
Only bismuth-tin, steel, copper-plated steel, nickel-plat -
ed steel, tin-plated steel, zinc-plated steel, zinc chloride-
plated steel, zinc chromate-plated steel, iron-tungsten, 
iron-tungsten-nickel, tungsten-bronze, tungsten-iron-
copper-nickel, tungsten-matrix, tungsten-polymer, tung -
sten-tin-iron, tungsten-tin-bismuth, and tungsten-tin-iron-
nickel or other nontoxic shot approved by the U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service may be used or possessed for wa -
terfowl, American coot and common moorhen hunting 
statewide.
Note: Nontoxic shot as described in Section 507.1 is 
certified for the purpose of taking mammals pursuant to 
subsection 250.1(b)(3).
Additional Information on Nonlead 
Ammunition
The following FAQs assist with clarifications on how to 
use nonlead ammunition:
How does the density difference between lead 
and the most common lead-free alternatives 
(copper) affect the grain weight a user 
chooses for hunting bullets?
Due to lead being denser than copper, equal caliber 
bullets of the same grain weight will have different 
lengths.
How does this affect the rifle’s potential 
accuracy if not accounted for?
Stabilization issues may occur in rifles with lower twist 
rates when using longer bullets. Because of the density 
differences, using a lighter grain lead-free bullet (about 
10%-20%) will ensure similar lengths to previously used 
lead-core bullets of greater grain weights. 
Note that copper bullets generally retain a higher 
percentage of their weight, so shooting a lighter-weight 
bullet does not compromise on energy transfer. Due to 
the higher weight retention, a copper bullet will usually 
out-penetrate a lead-based bullet of equal caliber. 
What is the recommended operating window 
for ideal terminal performance of most lead-
free options?
Most manufacturers recommend around 2000fps for 
a minimum impact at target to see ideal terminal 
performance due to the hardness of a copper bullet. 
This is similar to the manufacturers suggestions of 1800fps 
for lead bullets. Knowing the distance the bullet will 
drop to that speed is critical to avoiding shooting past 
the operational window of the bullet. 
Use of Nonlead Ammo
=== page 28 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
28
USE OF LIGHTS
Use of Lights While Hunting—Specific 
Areas (T14 CCR §264) 
(a) Lights of any size or voltage may be used to take 
furbearing or nongame mammals only in the areas 
described in subsections (b) and (c) below, and 
only under the following conditions:
(1) The use of lights for night hunting is prohibited in any 
area where the general deer season is open.
(2) Furbearing mammals and nongame mammals may 
be taken with the aid of a spotlight or other artificial 
light operated from a vehicle provided such ve-
hicle is stopped and standing with the motor off. No 
spotlight may be used from a vehicle which is on a 
public road or highway.
(b) Zone 1. (Portions of Butte, Colusa, Glenn, 
Placer, Sacramento, Sutter, Tehama, Yolo and 
Yuba counties.)
Area: Within the boundary beginning at the junction of 
Interstate 880 and Interstate 5 near Sacramento; east on 
Interstate 880 to its junction with Interstate 80; north and 
east on Interstate 80 to its junction with Highway 65 near 
Roseville, along Highway 65 to its junction with Highway 
20 at Marysville; west on Highway 20 to its junction with 
Highway 45; north on Highway 45 to its junction with 
Highway 162; east on Highway 162 to its junction with 
Highway 99; north on Highway 99 to South Avenue near 
the town of Corning; west on South Avenue to Interstate 5 
in Corning; north on Interstate 5 to Corning Road; west on 
Corning Road to Paskenta Road; west on the Paskenta 
Road to the town of Paskenta; southwest on the Round 
Valley Road to the Garland Road; south on the Garland 
Road to the town of Newville; south on the Newville-Elk 
Creek Road to the town of Elk Creek; south on the Elk 
Creek-Stonyford Road to the town of Stonyford; south 
on the Stonyford-Leesville Road to the town of Ladoga; 
south on the Stonyford-Leesville Road to the town of 
Leesville; south from Leesville on the Bear Valley Road to 
its intersection with Highway 20; east on Highway 20 to its 
intersection with Highway 16; south and east on Highway 
16 to its intersection with Interstate 5; east on Interstate 5 
to Interstate 880 and the point of beginning.
(c) Zone 2. (Portions of Inyo, Kern, Los Angeles, 
Mono and San Bernardino counties and all 
of Imperial, Orange, Riverside and San Diego 
counties.)
Area: Inyo, Mono and Kern counties south and east of 
a line beginning at the junction of Highway 182 and the 
California-Nevada state line; south on Highway 182 to its 
junction with Highway 395; south on Highway 395 to its in-
tersection with Highway 168 at Bishop; west on Highway 
168 to its intersection with the Inyo National Forest 
boundary; south on the Inyo National Forest bound -
ary to its junction with County Highway J41; south and 
east on County Highway J41 to its junction with Highway 
395; south on Highway 395 to its junction with Highway 
14 near Inyokern; south on Highway 14 to its junction 
with Highway 178 at Freeman; west on Highway 178 to 
its junction with the Bodfish-Caliente Road at Isabella; 
south on the Bodfish-Caliente Road to its junction with 
Highway 58; east on Highway 58 to its junction with 
the Los Angeles Aqueduct; south and west on the Los 
Angeles Aqueduct Road to its junction with 265th Street 
West near Neenach; south on 265th Street West to its 
junction with the Elizabeth Lake-Pine Canyon Road at 
Three Points; east along the Elizabeth Lake-Pine Canyon 
Road to its junction with Highway 14 at Palmdale; south 
on Highway 14 to its intersection with the Angeles Forest 
Highway; south on the Angeles Forest Highway to the Mill 
Creek Summit Road; east and south on the Mill Creek 
Summit Road to its intersection with the Angeles Crest 
Highway (Highway 2) at Upper Chilao Campground; 
east on the Angeles Crest Highway to its intersection 
with the Los Angeles-San Bernardino county line; north 
on the Los Angeles-Kern-San Bernardino county line to its 
intersection with Highway 58; east on Highway 58 to its 
intersection with the range line between R3W and R4W; 
south along the range line between R3W and R4W to the 
southeast corner of T8N, R4W; east along T8N to its inter -
section with the west boundary of the U.S. Marine Corps 
Training Center; south and east on that boundary to its in-
tersection with Giant Rock Road; east along Giant Rock 
Road to a point where it turns southeast and correspond-
ing with a projected north extension of Sunfair Road; 
south on Sunfair Road and its projected extension to the 
San Bernardino-Riverside county line; and all of Imperial, 
Orange, Riverside and San Diego counties.
Use of Lights While Hunting: Remainder 
of State (T14 CCR §264.5)
Lights may be used, in those portions of the state not 
listed in Section 264, to take furbearers and nongame 
mammals under the following conditions only:
(a) Only 9 volt lights or smaller, hand-held or worn on the 
head are permitted.
(b) Persons using such lights must be on foot.
(c) Lights may not be used in or from a vehicle and may 
not be attached or powered from any source other 
than self-contained batteries.
(d) A landowner or tenant suffering damage to livestock 
or other property by furbearing mammals or non-
game mammals may designate, in writing, persons 
Use of Lights
=== page 29 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
29
allowed by such landowner or tenant to use artificial 
lights in excess of 9 volts to assist in taking the dep-
redating mammals. The landowner or tenants shall 
notify the closest fish and game office whenever 
furbearing or nongame mammals are taken under 
this authority.
No furbearing or nongame mammals including any 
threatened, endangered or fully protected species may 
be taken contrary to any other prohibition set forth in 
these regulations.
Use of artificial lights; Infrared lights; 
Night vision equipment; Exceptions 
(FGC §2005)
(a) Except as otherwise authorized by this section, it is 
unlawful to use an artificial light to assist in the taking 
of a game bird, game mammal, or game fish.
(b) It is unlawful for one or more persons to throw or cast 
the rays of a spotlight, headlight, or other artificial 
light on a highway or in a field, woodland, or forest 
where game mammals, fur-bearing mammals, or 
nongame mammals are commonly found, or upon 
a game mammal, fur-bearing mammal, or non-
game mammal, while having in his or her possession 
or under his or her control a firearm or weapon with 
which that mammal could be killed, even though 
the mammal is not killed, injured, shot at, or other-
wise pursued.
(c) It is unlawful to use or possess night vision equipment 
to assist in the taking of a bird, mammal, amphibian, 
reptile, or fish. For purposes of this subdivision, “night 
vision equipment” includes, but is not limited to, the 
following:
(1) An infrared or similar light, used in connection with 
an electronic viewing device.
(2) An optical device, including, but not limited to, 
binoculars or a scope, that uses electrical or battery 
powered light amplifying circuits.
(d) This section does not apply to any of the following:
(1) Sport fishing in ocean waters, or other waters where 
night fishing is permitted, if an artificial light is not 
used on or as part of the fishing tackle.
(2) Commercial fishing.
(3) The taking of mammals governed by Article 2 (com-
mencing with Section 4180) of Chapter 3 of Part 3 of 
USE OF LIGHTS
Division 4.
(4) The use of a hand-held flashlight that is no larger and 
emits no more light than a two-cell, three-volt flash-
light, and is not affixed to a weapon.
(5) The use of a lamp or lantern that does not cast a 
directional beam of light.
(6) Headlights of a motor vehicle that are operated in 
a usual manner and without attempt or intent to 
locate a game mammal, fur-bearing mammal, or 
nongame mammal.
(7) An owner of land devoted to the agricultural indus-
try, or the owner’s employee, while on that land.
(8) An owner of land devoted to the agricultural indus-
try, or the owner’s employee, while on land con-
trolled by the owner in connection with the agricul-
tural industry.
(9) Other uses as the commission may authorize by 
regulation.
(e) A person shall not be arrested for violation of this 
section except by a peace officer.
The Fish and Game Code provides that the California Fish and Game Commission shall revoke 
the hunting privileges of any person who is convicted of three violations of the state’s hunting 
laws or regulations within any five-year period. (FGC 12155, CCR T-14 745.5).
The Department may inspect the 
following:
All boats, markets, stores and other build-
ings, except dwellings, and all receptacles, 
except the clothing actually worn by a per-
son at the time of inspection, where birds, 
mammals, fish, reptiles, or amphibia may be 
stored, placed, or held for sale or storage. 
FGC 1006.
All licenses, tags, and the birds, mammals, 
fish, reptiles, or amphibians taken or other-
wise dealt with under this code, and any 
device or apparatus designed to be, and 
capable of being, used to take birds, mam-
mals, fish, reptiles, or amphibians shall be 
exhibited upon demand to any game war-
den. FGC §2012.
Use of Lights
=== page 30 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
30
Use of Dogs for Pursuit/Take of Mammals 
or for Dog Training (T14 CCR §265)
(a) Prohibitions on the Use of dogs. 
The use of dogs for the pursuit/take of mammals or for 
dog training is prohibited as follows:
(1) The use of dogs is prohibited during the archery sea-
sons for deer or bear.
(2) The use of dogs is prohibited for the take of bear, 
bobcat, elk, bighorn sheep and antelope.
(3) Mountain lions may not be pursued with dogs ex-
cept under the provisions of a depredation permit 
issued pursuant to Section 4803 of the Fish and 
Game Code. Bear or bobcat may not be pursued 
with dogs except under the provisions of a permit is-
sued pursuant to sections 3960.2 or 3960.4 of the Fish 
and Game Code. Dog training on mountain lions is 
prohibited.
(4) The use of dogs for the pursuit/take of mammals or 
for dog training is prohibited from the first Saturday 
in April through the day preceding the opening of 
the general deer season in the following dog control 
zones:
(A) Central California Dog Control Zone 
Napa County north of Highway 128 and east of Highway 
29; Lake County east of a line beginning at the Lake-
Napa county line and Highway 29; northwest on Highway 
29 to Highway 53. From Highway 53 turn northwest 
on Highway 20; northwest on Highway 20 to the Lake-
Mendocino county line; north on the Lake-Mendocino 
county line to the Lake-Glenn county line; south on Lake-
Glenn county line to the Lake-Colusa county line; south 
on the Lake-Colusa county line to the Lake-Yolo county 
line; southwest on the Lake-Yolo county line to the Lake-
Napa county line; west on the Lake-Napa county line to 
the starting point. Mendocino County east of Highway 
101, and north of Highway 20. Sierra and Alpine coun -
ties and those portions of Nevada, Placer, Amador and 
Calaveras counties east of Highway 49; and El Dorado 
County east of the following line: Beginning at the junc -
tion of Highway 49 and the Placer-El Dorado county line; 
south on Highway 49 to Highway 193 at Cool; east and 
south along Highway 193 to Highway 49 in Placerville; 
south on Highway 49 to the Amador-El Dorado coun -
ty line; east on the El Dorado-Amador county line to 
the Alpine-El Dorado county line; east on the Alpine-El 
Dorado county line to the California -Nevada state line; 
north on the California-Nevada state line to the Placer-El 
Dorado county line; west on the Placer-El Dorado county 
line to the starting point.
(B) Northern California Dog Control Zone
Plumas and Trinity counties. Butte County east of the 
following line: Beginning at the junction of Highway 
99 and the Butte-Tehama county line; south and east 
along Highway 99 to Highway 149; south and east along 
Highway 149 to Highway 70; south along Highway 70 
to the Butte-Yuba county line; east on the Butte-Yuba 
county line to the Butte-Plumas county line; north on the 
Butte-Plumas county line to the Butte-Tehama county 
line southwest on the Butte-Tehama county line to the 
starting point. Del Norte County east of Highway 101. 
Glenn County west of a line beginning at the intersec -
tion of County Road 200 and the Glenn-Tehama coun -
ty line; southeast on County Road 200 to County Road 
306; south along County Road 306 to the Colusa-Glenn 
county line; west on the Colusa-Glenn county line to 
the Glenn-Lake county line; northwest on the Glenn-
Lake county line to the Glenn-Mendocino county line; 
north on the Glenn-Mendocino county line to the Glenn-
Tehama county line; east on the Glenn-Tehama coun -
ty line to the starting point. Humboldt County north of 
Highway 36 and east of Highway 101. Siskiyou County 
south and west of the line defined as follows: Beginning 
at the Oregon-California state line at Interstate 5, pro -
ceed south on Interstate 5 to Highway 97 at the town of 
Weed; north on Highway 97 to Meiss Lake Road near the 
town of Macdoel; east on Meiss Lake Road to Old State 
Highway; south on Old State Highway to Redrock Road; 
east on the Redrock Road (forest service road 15[8Q03] 
to Willow Creek Red Rock Road; north on Willow Creek 
Red Rock Road to the Gold Digger Pass Road (N8U01); 
east on the Gold Digger Pass Road to the western 
boundary of the Lava Beds National Monument; north 
and east on said boundary to the Siskiyou-Modoc coun-
ty line; south on the Siskiyou-Modoc county line to the 
Siskiyou-Shasta county line; west on the Siskiyou-Shasta 
county line to the Siskiyou-Trinity county line; west on 
the Siskiyou-Trinity county line to the Siskiyou-Humboldt 
county line; northwest on the Siskiyou-Humboldt county 
line to the Siskiyou-Del Norte county line; north on the 
Siskiyou-Del Norte county line to the California-Oregon 
state line; east on the California-Oregon state line to the 
starting point. Shasta County south and west of Highway 
89 and north of the line defined as follows: Beginning at 
the Shasta-Tehama county line and Highway 36 near 
the town of Beegum, go west on Highway 36 to County 
Road A16; north on County Road A16 to Pine Street in 
the city of Redding; north on Pine Street to Eureka Way 
(Highway 299); west on Eureka Way (Highway 299) to 
Highway 273; north on Highway 273 to Interstate 5; north 
on Interstate 5 to the south shore of Shasta Lake; east 
and north along the southern shore of Shasta Lake to 
Fender’s Ferry Road; southeast on Fender’s Ferry Road 
to Highway 299; southwest on Highway 299 to Oakrun 
Road; southwest on the Oakrun Road to Fern Road in 
the town of Oakrun; northeast on the Oakrun Road to 
Fern Road to the town of Fern; south and west on Fern 
USE OF DOGS
Use of Dogs
=== page 31 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
31
Road to Whitmore Road; east on Whitmore Road to 
the town of Whitmore. From Whitmore Road turn south 
on Ponderosa Way to Innwood Road; Innwood Road 
to Highway 44 near Innwood; east on Highway 44 to 
Wilson Hill Road; south on Wilson Hill Road to Rock Creek 
Road; south on Rock Creek Road to the Shasta-Tehama 
county line; east along the Shasta-Tehama county line to 
Highway 89; North on Highway 89 to the Shasta-Siskiyou 
county line; west along the Shasta-Siskiyou county line 
to the Shasta-Trinity county line; southeast along the 
Shasta-Trinity county line to the Shasta-Tehama county 
line; east along the Shasta-Tehama county line to the 
starting point. The following portions of Tehama County: 
Those portions of Tehama County within the Mendocino 
National Forest and east of Ponderosa Way. Those por -
tions of Tehama County within the Lassen National Forest.
Those portions of Tehama County east of Ponderosa 
Way. Those portions of Lassen County north and west of 
the following line: North from the Lassen-Sierra county line 
on Highway 395 to Highway 36 east of Susanville; north -
west on Highway 36 to Highway 139; north on Highway 
139 to the Lassen-Modoc county line; west along the 
Lassen-Modoc county line to the Lassen-Shasta county 
line; south along the Lassen-Shasta county line to the 
Plumas-Lassen county line; southeast along the Plumas-
Lassen county line to the Lassen-Sierra county line; east 
along the Lassen-Sierra county line to the starting point.
(C) Southern Sierra Dog Control Zone
Those portions of Tuolumne, Mariposa, Madera, Fresno 
and Tulare counties east of the following line beginning 
at the intersection of Highway 49 and the Calaveras-
Tuolumne county line; south on Highway 49 to Highway 
108; southwest on Highway 108 to Highway 120; east on 
Highway 120 to the Smith Station Road (J20); south on the 
Smith Station Road (J20) to the Greeley Hill Road; east 
on the Greeley Hill Road to the Briceburg Road; east on 
Briceburg Road to the North Fork of the Merced River at 
Bower Cave; south on the North Fork of the Merced River 
to Road 3S15 (Black Mountain Road/Ponderosa Way); 
south on Road 3S15 (Ponderosa Way) to Forest Service 
Road 3S02 (Ponderosa Way) crossing the U.S. Forest 
Service-Bureau of Land Management property bound -
ary in Section 28 located in Township 3S, Range 18E to 
Forest Service Road 2S05 (Bull Creek Road); south on 
Forest Service Road 2S05 (Bull Creek Road) to the Main 
Fork of the Merced River; west on the Main Fork of the 
Merced River to the southern boundary of Lake McClure; 
west on the southern boundary of Lake McClure to 
Highway 49; south on Highway 49 to Highway 140 at 
Mariposa; north on Highway 140 to the South Fork of the 
Merced River;east along the South Fork of the Merced 
River to Hite Cove Trail at Hite Cove. From Hite Cove 
south on the U.S. Forest Service Road (Hite Cove Trail) 
to Hite Cove Road; south on Hite Cove Road to Scott 
Road; south on Scott Road to Jerseydale Road; south 
on Jerseydale Road through Jerseydale Station and 
Darrah to the Darrah Road; south along Darrah Road 
to Highway 49; south along Highway 49 to Highway 41 
at Oakhurst; north along Highway 41 to its intersection 
with the Bass Lake Road at Yosemite Forks; south along 
Bass Lake Road to Road 274; south on Road 274 past Bass 
Lake on the east side of the lake to the junction with the 
Mammoth Pool Road at North Fork; west on Mammoth 
Pool Road to Road 222 (Auberry Road); south on Road 
222 (Auberry Road) to the San Joaquin River; east along 
the San Joaquin River to Italian Bar Road (Road 225) at 
the Italian Bar Bridge; south on Italian Bar Road (Road 
225) to Jose Basin Road (County Road M2441); east on 
Jose Basin Road (County Road M2441) to its intersection 
with Forestry Service Roads 8S08 (Railroad Grade Road) 
and 9S07 (Jose Basin Road); south on 9S07 (Jose Basin 
Road) to Jose Basin/Musick Farm Road; southeast on 9S07 
to Auberry Road near Pine Ridge; east on Auberry Road 
to North Toll House Road; south on North Toll House Road 
to Peterson Road; east on Peterson Road to Big Creek 
Road; east on Big Creek Road (10S02) near Peterson Mill 
to Dinkey-Trimmer Road (10S69 Trimmer Springs Road) 
at Haslett Basin; east on Dinkey-Trimmer Road (10S69) 
to Sycamore Springs Road (11S02); east on Sycamore 
Springs Road (11S02) to Black Rock Road (11S12) at Balch 
Camp; east on the Black Rock Road (11S12) to the de -
commissioned 11S07 (the old Rodgers Ridge Road) at 
Black Rock Reservoir Dam; east along decommissioned 
11S07 (old Rodgers Ridge Road) to Garlic Spur; south on 
Garlic Spur to the Kings River; west along the Kings River 
to Verplank Ridge; south on Verplank Ridge-Hoise Ridge 
to Forest Route 13S65; southeast on Forest Route 13S65 
to Forest Route 13S03; southeast on Forest Route 13S03 
to Highway 180 near Cherry Gap; south along Highway 
180 to the north boundary of Kings Canyon/Sequoia 
National Park; south along the western boundary of Kings 
Canyon/Sequoia National Park to the northern bound -
ary of Sequoia National Forest between Grouse Peak 
and Dennison Mountain; south along the common line 
between R29E and R30E, M.D.B.M. to the boundary of 
the Sequoia National Forest; east and south along that 
boundary to Balch Park Road; southeast along that road 
to the west boundary of Mountain Home Demonstration 
State Forest; south and east along that boundary to 
Forest Trail 30E14; southeast along 30E14 to the Doyle 
Springs Road (Wishon Drive);southwest along Doyle 
Springs Road (Wishon Drive) to Camp Wishon; southeast 
along the Alder Creek Grove-Hossack Meadow Road 
to Camp Nelson; east along Highway 190 to Coy Flat 
Road; south along Coy Flat Road to the boundary of 
USE OF DOGS
Use of Dogs
=== page 32 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
32
the Tule River Indian Reservation; south along the east 
boundary of that reservation (County Highway J42) to 
Parker Peak; southeast through Upper Parker Meadow 
to Parker Pass. Parker Pass to Forest Route 22S81; south 
through Starvation Creek Grove on Forest Route 22S81 to 
M504 (Parker Pass); south on M504 to Forest Route 23S64; 
southeast on 23S64 to the southwest corner of Section 15, 
T23S, R31E, M.D.B.M, continuing to the northeast corner 
of Section 22, T23S, R31E, M.D.B.M.; south approximately 
6 miles to Sugarloaf Winter Recreation Area.; southeast 
on Sugarloaf drive to Forest Road 24S23; northeast on 
Forest Route 24S23 to Forest Route 23S16; Southeast on 
Forest Route 23S16 to Portuguese Pass; southeast along 
Forest Route 23S16 (24S06) though Portuguese Pass to 
the Tulare-Kern county line; east along the Tulare-Kern 
county line to the Tulare-Inyo county line.; north along 
the Tulare-Inyo county line to Fresno-Inyo county line; 
north along the Fresno-Inyo county line to the Fresno-
Mono county line; north along the Fresno-Mono County 
line to the Mono-Madera county line; north along the 
Mono-Madera county line to the Mono-Tuolumne coun -
ty line; north along the Mono-Tuolumne county line to the 
Alpine-Tuolumne county line; northwest along the Alpine-
Tuolumne county line to the Calaveras-Tuolumne county 
line; southwest along the Calaveras-Tuolumne county 
line to the starting point. That portion of Kern County 
within a line beginning where the Tulare-Kern county line 
intersects the west boundary of the Sequoia National 
Forest; south along the said boundary to the Poso Flat 
Road; on Poso Flat Road to National Forest Route 25S03 
(Rancheria Road); northeast along National Forest 25S03 
(Rancheria Road) to National Forest 25S15 (Rancheria 
Road); north on National Forest 25S15 (Rancheria Road) 
to Rancheria Road; northeast along Rancheria Road 
through Shirley Meadow to Forest Highway 90 (Forest 
Route 23S16) at Greenhorn Summit; northeast on Forest 
Highway 90 (Forest Route 23S16) to Cow Creek; northeast 
on Cow Creek to Bull Run Creek; north on Bull Run Creek 
to the Tulare-Kern county line; west along said county 
line to the point of beginning, Those portions of Inyo and 
Mono counties west of Highway 395.
(D) Southern California Dog Control Zone
Those portions of Los Angeles, Ventura and Santa Barbara 
counties within the Los Padres and Angeles National 
Forests; and those portions of San Bernardino County 
within the San Bernardino and Angeles National Forests.
(b) Authorized Use of Dogs
The use of dogs for the pursuit/take of mammals or for 
dog training is authorized as follows:
(1) Dog Control Zones
The use of dogs for the pursuit/take of mammals or for 
dog training is permitted in the dog control zones de -
scribed in subsections 265(a)(4)(A), (B), (C) and (D) from 
the opening day of the general deer season through the 
first Friday in April.
(2) Areas of the State Outside the Dog Control Zones
The use of dogs for the pursuit/take of mammals or for 
dog training in areas outside of the dog control zones 
is permitted year-round, except for closures and restric -
tions described in this Section 265 and Section 364, and 
the provisions of sections 3960 and 4800 of the Fish and 
Game Code which prohibit allowing any dog to pursue 
any big game mammal during the closed season on 
such mammal or mountain lions, elk or any fully-protect-
ed, threatened or endangered mammal at any time.
(3) Take of Depredating Mammals
The use of dogs is permitted for pursuing/taking depre -
dating mammals by federal and county animal dam -
age control officers or by permittees authorized under a 
depredation permit issued by the department.
(4) Take of Furbearers and Nongame Mammals
Furbearers and nongame mammals as specified in sub -
section 472(a) may be taken with the aid of dogs during 
the appropriate open season, except for closures and 
restrictions described in subsections 265(a) and (b).
(5) Prohibition on Starting Pursuit Within 400 Yards of 
Baited Area
Pursuits may not be started within 400 yards of a baited 
area as described in Section 257.5 of these regulations.
(6) Dog Training 
Except for the prohibitions of subsection 265(a), dog 
training is permitted pursuant to the following provisions:
(A) Dog Training Defined. For purposes of these regu-
lations, dog training is defined as the education 
of dogs through “breaking” or “practicing” under 
strict provisions that preclude the injuring or take 
of animals. Training is distinguished from “pursuit”, 
as used in Section 86 of the Fish and Game Code, 
in that the animal being chased shall not be killed, 
captured, or injured.
(B) Prohibition on Killing, Capturing or Injuring Mammals. 
No person shall kill, capture or injure any mammal, 
nor shall any person’s dog be allowed to kill, cap-
ture or injure any mammal during dog training.
(C) Prohibition on Possession of Equipment. No firearm, 
archery gear, crossbow or other instrument 
capable of killing, injuring or capturing any animal 
may be possessed by any person training dogs 
during the seasons described in subsection 265(b)
(6)(F) below. Possession of a firearm, archery gear, 
USE OF DOGS
=== page 33 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
33
USE OF DOGS
crossbow or other instrument capable of killing or 
capturing any animal is prohibited while training 
dogs, but such equipment may be transported 
to or from a campsite, transported to or from a 
residence or lawfully possessed by a person at a 
campsite provided all dogs are secured and under 
the control of the owner, agent or person training or 
transporting said dogs.
(D) Prohibition on Starting Dog Training Within 400 Yards 
of Baited Area. Dog Training may not be started 
within 400 yards of a baited area as described in 
Section 257.5 of these regulations.
(E) Prohibition on Training Dogs on Big Game Mammals, 
Bobcat or on Protected, Threatened or Endangered 
Mammals It shall be unlawful to train any dog on 
any big game mammal, bobcat, or to train any dog 
on any fully-protected, threatened or endangered 
mammal at any time. A person in possession of a 
valid deer tag may utilize the general deer season 
for purposes of educating a dog for deer. Only one 
dog may be used for training in areas where the 
general deer season (as described in subsection 
360(a) and (b)) is open(F) Seasons
1. Gray Fox. Dogs may be trained on gray fox from 
March 1 through the day preceding the opening of 
the general gray fox season, except for closures and 
restrictions described in subsections 265(a) and (b).
2. Raccoon. Dogs may be trained on raccoon from April 
1 through the day preceding the opening of the 
general raccoon season, except for closures and 
restrictions described in subsections 265(a) and (b).
3. Other Mammals. Except for closures and prohibitions 
described in this Section 265 and sections 3960 
and 4800 of the Fish and Game Code, dogs may 
be trained on mammals other than gray fox and 
raccoon at any time.
(c) Restrictions on the Number of Dogs per Hunter
(1) One Dog per Hunter Limitation During Deer Season
No more than one dog per hunter may be used in the 
area where the general deer season is open.
(2) Three Dogs per Hunter Limitation for the Take of Wild 
Pigs
Up to three dogs per hunter may be used for the purpose 
of taking wild pigs, pursuant to the following provisions:
(A) No more than one dog per hunter may be used in 
an area where the general deer season is open.
(B) No dogs may be used within the closures described 
in subsection 265(a).

=== page 34 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
34
HOW TO PROPERLY FILL OUT A TAG (HUNTED, HARVESTED)
Upon harvesting 
a deer, cut along 
the dotted line 
to separate the 
Harvest Report 
Card (the top 
half) to the antler 
portion (the 
bottom half).
Fully notch/
cut out the 
month and 
date of kill.
Answer ALL harvest 
info questions
Record your harvest report confirmation 
number here. 
A confirmation number is provided if you 
submit your report online.
If you submit by mail, you will receive a 
confirmation number by email if you have an 
email address in your profile.
Attach to antler portion
How to Properly Fill Out a Tag
=== page 35 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
35
HOW TO PROPERLY FILL OUT A TAG (HUNTED & NO HARVEST OR NO HUNT)
Record 
your harvest 
report 
confirmation 
number here
Record your harvest report confirmation 
number here.
A confirmation number is provided if you 
submit your report online.
If you submit by mail, you will receive a 
confirmation number by email if you have 
an email address in your profile.

=== page 36 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
36
BIG GAME HUNTING
Shooting Hours on Big Game (T14 CCR 
§352)
Hunting and shooting hours for big game, including but 
not limited to deer, antelope, elk, and bear shall be from 
one-half hour before sunrise to one-half hour after sunset.
Methods Authorized for Taking Big 
Game (T14 CCR §353)
(a) It shall be unlawful to take or attempt to take big 
game in violation of this section or Section 250.1. 
The take or attempted take of any big game (as 
defined by Section 350 of these regulations) with a 
firearm shall be in accordance with the use of non-
lead projectiles and ammunition pursuant to Section 
250.1 of these regulations.
(b) Definition
For purposes of this section, a projectile is any bullet, ball, 
sabot, slug, buckshot or other device which is expelled 
from a firearm through a barrel by force. The following 
definitions shall apply:
(1) A softnose or expanding projectile is a bullet designed 
to increase from its original diameter, commonly 
referred to as “mushrooming”, and retain a significant 
part of its original weight upon impact with, or when 
passing through the tissues of an animal.
(2) Projectiles commonly referred to as “frangible” bul-
lets, designed to disintegrate upon impact with, or 
when passing through the tissues of an animal are 
not softnose or expanding projectiles.
(c) Except for the provisions of the following subsections 
(d) through (j), big game may only be taken by rifles 
using centerfire cartridges with softnose or expand-
ing projectiles; bow and arrow (see Section 354 of 
these regulations for archery equipment regulations); 
or wheellock, matchlock, flintlock or percussion type, 
including “in-line” muzzleloading rifles using black pow-
der or equivalent black powder substitute, including 
pellets, with a single projectile loaded from the muzzle 
and at least .40 caliber in designation.
(d) Shotguns capable of holding not more than three 
shells firing single slugs may be used for the tak-
ing of deer, bear and wild pigs. In areas where the 
discharge of rifles or shotguns with slugs is prohibited 
by county ordinance, shotguns capable of holding 
not more than three shells firing size 0 or 00 buckshot 
may be used for the taking of deer only.
(e) Pistols and revolvers using centerfire cartridges with 
softnose or expanding projectiles may be used to 
take deer, bear, and wild pigs.
(f) Pistols and revolvers with minimum barrel lengths of 
4 inches, using centerfire cartridges with softnose or 
expanding projectiles may be used to take elk and 
bighorn sheep.
(g) Except as provided in subsection 354(j) of these 
regulations, crossbows may be used to take deer 
and wild pigs only during the regular seasons.
(h) Under the provisions of a muzzleloading rifle only 
tag, hunters may only possess muzzleloading rifles 
as described in subsection (c) equipped with open 
or “peep” type sights only except as described in 
subsection (l).
(i) Under the provisions of a muzzleloading rifle/archery 
tag, hunters may only possess muzzleloading rifles with 
sights as described in subsection (h); archery equip-
ment as described in Section 354 of these regulations; 
or both. For purposes of this subsection, archery equip-
ment does not include crossbows, except as provided 
in subsection 354(j) of these regulations.
(j) Except as otherwise provided, while taking or at-
tempting to take big game under the provisions 
of this section or Section 354 of these regulations it 
is unlawful to use any device or devices which: 1) 
throw, cast or project an artificial light or electroni-
cally alter or intensify a light source for the purpose 
of visibly enhancing an animal; or 2) throw, cast or 
project an artificial light or electronically alter or 
intensify a light source for the purpose of providing 
a visible point of aim directly on an animal. Devices 
commonly referred to as “sniperscopes”, night vision 
scopes or binoculars, or those utilizing infra-red, heat 
sensing or other non-visible spectrum light technol-
ogy used for the purpose of visibly enhancing an 
animal or providing a visible point of aim directly 
on an animal are prohibited and may not be pos-
sessed while taking or attempting to take big game. 
Devices commonly referred to as laser rangefinders, 
“red-dot” scopes with self-illuminating reticles, and 
fiberoptic sights with self-illuminating sight or pins 
which do not throw, cast or project a visible light 
onto an animal are permitted.
(k) Unless provided in these regulations or any other 
law, it is unlawful to possess a loaded muzzleloading 
firearm in any vehicle or conveyance or its attach-
ments which is standing on or along or is being 
driven on or along any public road or highway or 
other way open to the public. 
For the purposes of this section, a muzzleloading 
firearm shall be deemed to be loaded when it is 
capped or primed or has an electronic or other 
ignition device attached and has a powder charge 
and projectile or shot in the barrel or cylinder.
(l) Upon application to the department, the department 
may issue a Disabled Muzzleloader Scope Permit, free 
of any charge or fee, to any person with a physical 
disability, as defined in subsection (m), which pre-
vents him/her from being able to focus on the target 
utilizing muzzleloading rifles equipped with open or 
“peep” sights. The Disabled Muzzleloader Scope 
Big Game Hunting
=== page 37 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
37
Permit authorizes the disabled hunter to use a 1X 
scope on a muzzleloading rifle, as described in sub-
section (h), with a muzzleloading rifle only tag.
(1) Applications for a Disabled Muzzleloader Scope Permit 
as specified in Section 702 of these regulations shall be 
submitted to the department at the address specified 
on the application and shall include:
(A) Applicant’s name
(B) Applicant’s physical address
(C) Applicant’s date of birth
(D) Applicant’s Driver’s License or DMV Number
(E) Applicant’s telephone number
(F) Applicant’s signature
(G) Medical Physician’s or Optometrist’s name
(H) Medical Physician’s or Optometrist’s business 
address
(I) Medical Physician’s or Optometrist’s business tele-
phone number
(J) Medical Physician’s State medical license number or 
Optometrist’s State license number
(K) A description of the visual disability requiring this 
permit
(L) Medical Physician’s or Optometrist’s signature
(M) Signature of the authorizing department employee 
and date issued
(2) The applicant must have a valid hunting license for 
the year for which he/she is applying.
(3) Proof of meeting eligibility requirements may be 
met by providing a previously issued Disabled 
Muzzleloader Scope Permit.
(4) The valid Disabled Muzzleloader Scope Permit shall 
be in the hunter’s immediate possession while hunt-
ing and shall be shown on demand to any person 
authorized to enforce this regulation.
(5) The Disabled Muzzleloader Scope Permit is valid from 
July 1 through June 30 of the following year or if issued 
after July 1 of the license year, it is valid beginning on 
the date issued through to the following June 30
(m) For the purposes of this section a visual disability 
means a permanent loss, significant limitation, or 
diagnosed disease or disorder, which substantially 
impairs the vision of a hunter, preventing the hunter 
from viewing and aligning the sights of a muzzle-
loading rifle with the target in order to hunt deer.
Archery Equipment and Crossbow 
Regulations (T14 CCR §354)
(a) Bow, as used in these regulations, means any device 
consisting of a flexible material having a string con-
necting its two ends and used to propel an arrow 
held in a firing position by hand only. Bow, includes 
long bow, recurve or compound bow.
(b) Crossbow, as used in these regulations means any 
device consisting of a bow or cured latex band or other 
flexible material (commonly referred to as a linear bow) 
affixed to a stock, or any bow that utilizes any device 
attached directly or indirectly to the bow for the pur-
pose of keeping a crossbow bolt, an arrow or the string 
in a firing position. Except as provided in subsection 
354(j), a crossbow is not archery equipment and can-
not be used during the archery deer season.
(c) For the taking of big game, hunting arrows and cross-
bow bolts with a broad head type blade which will 
not pass through a hole seven-eighths inch in diam-
eter shall be used. Mechanical/retractable broad 
heads shall be measured in the open position. For 
the taking of migratory game birds, resident small 
game, furbearers and nongame mammals and birds 
any arrow or crossbow bolt may be used except as 
prohibited by subsection (d) below. Notwithstanding 
the general prohibition of the use of lights in Fish and 
Game Code section 2005, arrows or crossbow bolts 
with lighted nocks that do not emit a directional 
beam of light may be used.
(d) No arrows or crossbow bolt with an explosive head 
or with any substance which would tranquilize or 
poison any animal may be used. No arrows or cross-
bow bolt without flu-flu fletching may be used for 
the take of pheasants and migratory game birds, 
except for provisions of section 507(a)(2).
(e) No arrow or crossbow bolt may be released from a 
bow or crossbow upon or across any highway, road 
or other way open to vehicular traffic.
(f) It shall be unlawful to use any bow or crossbow with-
out a draw weight of at least 30 pounds for a bow or 
125 pounds for a cross bow.
(g) Except as described in subsection 354(j), crossbows 
may not be used to take game birds and game 
mammals during archery seasons.
(h) Archers may not use or possess a firearm while in the 
field engaged in archery hunting during an archery 
season or while hunting during a general season 
under the provisions of an archery only tag except 
as provided in subsections (h)(1) or (h)(2).
(1) An archer may carry a firearm capable of being 
concealed on his or her person while engaged in the 
taking of big game other than deer with a bow and 
arrow in accordance with subdivision (h), but shall not 
take or attempt to take big game with the firearm.
(2) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the lawful posses-
sion of a firearm capable of being concealed on 
his or her person by an active peace officer listed in 
Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 
of Part 2 of the Penal Code or a retired peace officer 
in lawful possession of an identification certificate 
issued pursuant to Penal Code Section 25455 authoriz-
ing the retired officer to carry a concealed firearm.
(i) No person may nock or fit the notch in the end of an 
arrow to a bowstring or crossbow string in a ready-
to-fire position while in or on any vehicle.
BIG GAME HUNTING
=== page 38 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
38
DEER ZONES AND ADDITIONAL HUNTS
Deer Zones and Additional Hunts
=== page 39 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
39

=== page 40 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
40
Deer (T14 CCR §360)
Except as otherwise provided in this Title 14, deer may be 
taken only as follows:
(a) A, B, C, and D Zone Hunts.
(1) Zone A.
(A) Area: Shall include all of Zone A-South Unit 110 and 
Zone A-North Unit 160 (see subsections 360(a)(1)
(A)1. through 2.).
1. South Unit 110. 
In those portions of Alameda, Contra Costa, Fresno, Kern, 
Kings, Los Angeles, Madera, Merced, Monterey, San 
Benito, San Joaquin, San Luis Obispo, San Mateo, Santa 
Barbara, Santa Clara, Santa Cruz, Stanislaus, Tulare and 
Ventura counties within a line beginning at the intersection 
of Highway 99 and the San Joaquin-Sacramento county 
line at Dry Creek; south on Highway 99 to Highway 166 in 
Kern County; west on Highway 166 to Highway 33; south on 
Highway 33 to Sespe Creek; east and south along Sespe 
Creek to Highway 126; east on Highway 126 to Interstate 
5; south on Interstate 5 and 405 to Interstate 10; west on 
Interstate 10 to the Pacific Ocean; north on the Pacific 
Ocean coastline to the San Mateo-San Francisco coun -
ty line; east on the San Mateo-San Francisco county line 
to the Alameda county line; north on the Alameda-San 
Francisco county line to the Contra Costa-San Francisco 
county line; northwest on Contra Costa-San Francisco 
county line to the Contra Costa-Marin county line; north-
east on the Contra Costa-Marin county line to the Contra 
Costa-Solano county line in San Pablo Bay; east on the 
Contra Costa-Solano county line and the Sacramento 
River to the confluence of the San Joaquin River and 
Sacramento-Contra Costa county line; east on the 
Sacramento-Contra Costa county line and San Joaquin 
River to the confluence of the Mokelumne River and San 
Joaquin-Sacramento county line; northeast on the San 
Joaquin-Sacramento county line and Mokelumne River to 
the confluence of Dry Creek; east on the San Joaquin-
Sacramento county line and Dry Creek to the point of be-
ginning at Highway 99.
2. North Unit 160. 
In those portions of Colusa, Glenn, Lake, Marin, 
Mendocino, Napa, Sacramento, Solano, Sonoma 
and Yolo within a line beginning at the junction of the 
mouth of Hardy Creek (Mendocino County) and the 
Pacific Ocean; east along Hardy Creek to Highway 
1; north along Highway 1 to Highway 101; south along 
Highway 101 to Commercial Avenue in the town of Willits; 
east on Commercial Avenue to the Hearst-Willits Road 
(County Road 306); north and east on the Hearst-Willits 
Road to the Main Eel River; southeast on the Main Eel 
River to Lake Pillsbury at Scott Dam; southeast along the 
west shore of Lake Pillsbury and the Rice Fork of the Eel 
River to Forest Service Road M-10; east on Forest Service 
Road M-10 to Forest Service Road 17N16; east on Forest 
Service Road 17N16 to Forest Service Road M-10; east 
on Forest Service Road M-10 to Letts Valley-Fouts Spring 
Road; east on the Letts Valley-Fouts Spring Road to the 
Elk Creek-Stonyford Road (County Road 306); north 
on the Elk Creek-Stonyford Road to the Glenn-Colusa 
county line; east along the Glenn-Colusa County line to 
Interstate 5; Interstate 5 south to Highway 99 in the City 
of Sacramento; Highway 99 south to the Sacramento/
San Joaquin County line at Dry Creek, west along the 
Sacramento/San Joaquin County line and Dry Creek 
to the confluence with the Mokelumne River, south -
west on the Sacramento/San Joaquin County line and 
Mokelumne River to the confluence with the San Joaquin 
River and Sacramento/Contra Costa County line, west 
on the Sacramento/Contra Costa County line and San 
Joaquin River to the confluence of the Sacramento 
River and Solano/Contra Costa County line, west on the 
Sacramento River and Solano/Contra Costa County line 
to the Marin County line in San Pablo Bay, southwest on 
the Marin/Contra Costa and Marin/San Francisco coun -
ty lines to the North Peninsula shoreline near the Golden 
Gate Bridge, west on the shoreline to the Pacific Ocean 
coastline, northwest on the Pacific Ocean coastline to 
the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone A-South Unit 110 and 
Zone A-North Unit 160 shall open on the second 
Saturday in August and extend for 44 consecutive 
days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 65,000. Zone A tags are valid in 
Zone A-South Unit 110 and Zone A-North Unit 160.
(2) Zone B.
(A) Area: Shall include all of Zones B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5 
and B-6 (see subsections 360(a)(2)(A) 1-6).
1. Zone B-1.
In the County of Del Norte and those portions of Glenn, 
Humboldt, Lake, Mendocino, Siskiyou and Trinity counties 
within a line: Beginning at the California-Oregon state line 
and the Pacific Ocean; east along the state line to the 
point where Cook-Green Pass Road (Forest Service Road 
48N20) intersects the California-Oregon state line; south 
on the Cook-Green Pass Road to Highway 96 near Seiad 
Valley; west and south along Highway 96 to Highway 
299 at Willow Creek; southeast along Highway 299 to the 
DEER HUNTING
Deer Hunting
=== page 41 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
41
South Fork of the Trinity River; southeast along the South 
Fork of the Trinity River to the boundary of the Yolla Bolly-
Middle Eel Wilderness Area; southwest along the bound -
ary of the Yolla Bolly-Middle Eel Wilderness Area to the 
Four Corners Rock-Washington Rock Trail; south and east 
on the Four Corners Rock-Washington Rock Trail to the 
North Fork of Middle Fork Eel River; south on the North Fork 
of Middle Fork Eel River to Middle Fork Eel River; east on 
Middle Fork Eel River to confluence with Balm of Gilead 
Creek; north and east on Balm of Gilead Creek to conflu-
ence with Minnie Creek; east and south on Minnie Creek 
to Soldier Ridge Trail; north on Soldier Ridge Trail to Summit 
Trail; south on Summit Trail to Green Springs Trail head at 
Pacific Crest Road (U.S. Forest Service Road M-2); south 
on the Mendocino Pass Road to the intersection of Forest 
Highway 7; west on Forest Highway 7 to the Middle Fork 
of the Eel River near Eel River Work Center; southwest on 
the Middle Fork of the Eel River to the Black Butte River; 
Black Butte River to the Glenn-Mendocino county line; 
south along the Glenn-Mendocino and Lake-Mendocino 
county lines to the northern boundary of State Game 
Refuge 2-A; east and south along the northern and east-
ern boundaries of State Game Refuge 2-A to the Glenn-
Lake near Sheetiron Mountain; south along the Glenn-
Lake and Colusa-Lake county lines to Forest Service 
Road 17N16; west on Forest Service Road 17N16 to Forest 
Service Road M-10; west on Forest Service Road M-10 to 
the Rice Fork of the Eel River; northwest along the Rice 
Fork of the Eel River and the shore of Lake Pillsbury to the 
Main Eel River at Scott Dam; west and north along the 
Main Eel River to the Hearst-Willits Road; southwest on 
the Hearst-Willits Road to Commercial Avenue; west on 
Commercial Avenue to Highway 101; north on Highway 
101 to Highway 1 at Leggett; west on Highway 1 to its 
intersection with the South Fork of the Eel River; north and 
west along the South Fork of the Eel River to the main Eel 
River; west and north along the main Eel River to mouth 
of the Eel River and north along the Pacific coastline to 
the point of beginning.
2. Zone B-2.
In those portions of Humboldt, Shasta, Siskiyou, Tehama, and 
Trinity counties within a line beginning at the intersection of 
Interstate 5 and Highway 299 in Redding; west on Highway 
299 to the Bully Choop Mountain Road at the Shasta-
Trinity county line and Buckhorn Summit; south on the Bully 
Choop Mountain Road to a point where this road leaves 
the Shasta-Trinity county line at Mud Springs; southwest 
along the Shasta-Trinity county line to the Browns Creek-
Harrison Gulch Road; south on the Browns Creek-Harrison 
Gulch Road to Highway 36; east on Highway 36 (200 yards) 
to Forest Service Arterial Road 41; south on Forest Service 
Arterial Road 41 to Stuart Gap at the Tehama-Trinity county 
line; south on the Tehama-Trinity county line to the north 
boundary of the Yolla Bolly-Middle Eel Wilderness Area; 
west and south on the Yolla Bolly-Middle Eel Wilderness 
boundary to the South Fork of the Trinity River; north and 
west along the South Fork of the Trinity River to Highway 299; 
west and north on Highway 299 to Highway 96 at Willow 
Creek; north on Highway 96 to the Cecilville-Salmon River 
Road (Forest Service Road 93) at Somes Bar; east along 
the Cecilville-Salmon River Road to Highway 3 at Callahan; 
east along Highway 3 to the Gazelle-Callahan Road (Forest 
Service Road 1219); east along the Gazelle-Callahan Road 
to Highway 99; north along Highway 99 to Louie Road; east 
along Louie Road to Interstate 5; south along Interstate 5 to 
the point of beginning.
3. Zone B-3.
In those portions of Colusa, Glenn, Lake, Mendocino, and 
Tehama counties within a line beginning at the intersec -
tion of Interstate 5 and Black Butte Reservoir Road; south 
on Interstate 5 to the Glenn-Colusa county line; west along 
the Glenn-Colusa county line to the Elk Creek-Stonyford 
Road (County Road 306); south on the Elk Creek-Stonyford 
Road to the Letts Valley-Fouts Spring Road; west on the 
Letts Valley-Fouts Spring Road through Fouts Spring to Forest 
Service Road M-10; west on Forest Service Road M-10 to 
the Colusa-Lake county line; north along the Colusa-Lake 
and Glenn-Lake county lines to the eastern boundary of 
State Game Refuge 2-A, near Sheetiron Mountain; north 
and west along the eastern and northern boundaries of 
State Game Refuge 2-A to the Lake-Mendocino county 
line; north on the Lake-Mendocino and Glenn-Mendocino 
county lines to the Black Butte River; northwest along the 
Black Butte River to the Middle Fork of the Eel River; east 
and north along the Middle Fork of the Eel River to Forest 
Highway 7 near the Eel River Work Center; east on Forest 
Highway 7 to the Low Gap-Government Flat Road; north on 
the Low Gap-Government Flat Road to the Round Valley-
Paskenta Road at Government Flat; east on the Round 
Valley-Paskenta Road to the Black Butte Lake-Newville 
Road; south and east on the Black Butte Lake-Newville 
Road to Interstate 5 at the point of beginning.
4. Zone B-4.
In those portions of Mendocino and Humboldt counties 
within a line beginning at the mouth of Hardy Creek and 
the Pacific Ocean; north along the Pacific coastline to the 
mouth of the Eel River; east and south along the main Eel 
River to the South Fork of the Eel River; south along the 
South Fork of the Eel River to state Highway 1 at Leggett; 
west on state Highway 1 to Hardy Creek; west along Hardy 
Creek to the point of beginning.
DEER HUNTING
=== page 42 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
42
5. Zone B-5.
In those portions of Glenn, Mendocino, Shasta, Tehama 
and Trinity counties within a line beginning at the inter -
section of Highway 299 and Interstate 5 in Redding; south 
along Interstate 5 to the Black Butte Lake-Newville Road 
near Orland; west and north on the Black Butte Lake-
Newville Road to the Round Valley-Paskenta Road; west 
on the Round Valley-Paskenta Road to the Pacific Crest 
Road (U.S. Forest Service Road M-2) near Government 
Flat; north on the Pacific Crest Road to the Summit 
Trailhead at Green Springs; north along Summit Trail to 
Soldier Ridge Trail; south and west along Soldier Ridge 
Trail to Minnie Creek; north and west on Minnie Creek to 
Balm of Gilead Creek; west on Balm of Gilead Creek to 
the Middle Fork of the Eel River; west on the Middle Fork 
of the Eel River to the North Fork of the Middle Fork of the 
Eel River; north on the North Fork of the Middle Fork of the 
Eel River to the Four Corners Rock-Washington Rock Trail; 
north and west on the Four Corners Rock-Washington 
Rock Trail to the boundary of the Yolla Bolly-Middle Eel 
Wilderness Area; north along the boundary of the Yolla 
Bolly-Middle Eel Wilderness Area to the Tehama-Trinity 
county line; north on the Tehama-Trinity county line to 
Forest Service Arterial Road 41 at Stuart Gap; north on 
Forest Service Arterial Road 41 to Highway 36; west on 
Highway 36 (200 yards) to the Browns Creek-Harrison 
Gulch Road; north on the Browns Creek-Harrison Gulch 
Road to the Shasta-Trinity county line; northeast along the 
Shasta-Trinity county line to Mud Springs, where the Bully 
Choop Mountain Road joins the Shasta-Trinity county line; 
north on the Bully Choop Mountain Road to Highway 299 
at Buckhorn Summit and the Shasta-Trinity county line; 
east on Highway 299 to Interstate 5 in Redding.
6. Zone B-6.
In that portion of Siskiyou County within a line beginning 
at the California-Oregon state line and its intersection with 
Interstate 5; south on Interstate 5 to Louie Road near Gazelle; 
west on Louie Road to Highway 99; south on Highway 99 
to the Gazelle-Callahan Road at Gazelle; west on the 
Gazelle-Callahan Road to Highway 3; west on Highway 3 
to the Cecilville-Salmon River Road (Forest Service Road 
93) at Callahan; west on the Cecilville-Salmon River Road 
to Highway 96 at Somes Bar; north on Highway 96 to the 
Cook-Green Pass Road at Seiad Valley; north on the Cook-
Green Pass Road to the California-Oregon state line; east 
along the California-Oregon state line to Interstate 5.
(B) Season: The seasons for the B Zone shall be those 
specified for the areas described as B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, 
B-5 and B-6 (see subsections 360(a)(2)(B)1-6).
1. Zone B-1.
The season in Zone B-1 shall open on the third Saturday in 
September and extend for 37 consecutive days.
2. Zone B-2.
The season in Zone B-2 shall open on the third Saturday in 
September and extend for 37 consecutive days.
3. Zone B-3.
The season in Zone B-3 shall open on the third Saturday in 
September and extend for 37 consecutive days.
4. Zone B-4.
The season in Zone B-4 shall open on the fourth Saturday 
in August and extend for 37 consecutive days.
5. Zone B-5.
The season in Zone B-5 shall open on the third Saturday in 
September and extend for 37 consecutive days.
6. Zone B-6.
The season in Zone B-6 shall open on the third Saturday in 
September and extend for 30 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 35,000. Zone B tags are valid in 
Zones B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5 and B-6
(3) Zone C.
(A) Area: Shall include all of Zones C-1, C-2, C-3, and 
C-4 (see subsections 360(a)(3)(A)1. through 4.).
1. Zone C-1.
In that portion of Siskiyou County within a line beginning 
at the California-Oregon state line and its intersection with 
Interstate 5; south on Interstate 5 to Highway 97 at Weed; 
north and east on Highway 97 to the intersection with the 
California-Oregon state line; west on the California-Oregon 
state line to the point of beginning.
2. Zone C-2.
In those portions of Shasta and Siskiyou counties within a line 
beginning at the junction of Interstate 5 and Highway 89 
south of the town of Mt. Shasta; east and south on Highway 
89 to the Pit River at Lake Britton; west and south along the 
Pit River to Interstate 5 at Shasta Lake; north on Interstate 5 
to the point of beginning.
3. Zone C-3.
In that portion of Shasta County within a line beginning 
at the intersection of Cottonwood Creek and Interstate 
5 at Cottonwood; north on Interstate 5 to the Pit River at 
Shasta Lake; east and north on the Pit River to Highway 
89 at Lake Britton; south on Highway 89 to Highway 44 
at Old Station; south and west on Highway 44 to the 
North Fork of Battle Creek; southwest on the North Fork 
DEER HUNTING
=== page 43 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
43
of Battle Creek to Battle Creek; west on Battle Creek to 
the Sacramento River; north on the Sacramento River to 
the mouth of Cottonwood Creek; west on Cottonwood 
Creek to the point of beginning.
4. Zone C-4.
In those portions of Butte, Glenn, Lassen, Plumas, 
Shasta, and Tehama counties within a line beginning 
at the junction of Interstate 5 and Cottonwood Creek 
at Cottonwood; east on Cottonwood Creek to the 
Sacramento River; south on the Sacramento River to 
Battle Creek; east on Battle Creek to the North Fork of 
Battle Creek; northeast on the North Fork of Battle Creek 
to Highway 44; east on Highway 44 to Highway 89 at 
the north entrance of Lassen Volcanic National Park; 
north and east on Highway 89 and 44 to the junction of 
Highway 44 at Old Station; south and east on Highway 44 
to Highway 36 west of Susanville; west on Highway 36 to 
Highway 147 near Westwood; south on Highway 147 to 
Highway 89; south on Highway 89 to Highway 70; south -
west on Highway 70 to Highway 162 at Oroville; west 
on Highway 162 to Interstate 5; north on Interstate 5 to 
Cottonwood Creek to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The seasons for the C Zone shall be those 
specified for the areas described as C-1, C-2, C-3, 
and C-4 (see subsections 360(a)(3)(B)1. through 4.).
1. Zone C-1.
The season in Zone C-1 shall open on the third Saturday in 
September and extend for 30 consecutive days.
2. Zone C-2.
The season in Zone C-2 shall open on the third Saturday in 
September and extend for 37 consecutive days.
3. Zone C-3.
The season in Zone C-3 shall open on the third Saturday in 
September and extend for 37 consecutive days.
4. Zone C-4.
The season in Zone C-4 shall open on the third Saturday in 
September and extend for 16 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 8,150. Zone C tags are valid in 
Zones C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-4 during the general sea-
son only as described above in subsections 360(a)
(3)(B)1. through 4.
(4) Zone D-3-5.
(A) Area: Shall include all of zones D-3, D-4, and D-5 (see 
subsections 360(a)(4)(A)1. through 3.).
1. Zone D-3.
In those portions of Butte, Colusa, Glenn, Nevada, Placer, 
Plumas, Sierra, Sutter and Yuba counties within a line be-
ginning at the junction of Interstate 5 and Highway 162 at 
Willows; east on Highway 162 to Highway 70 at Oroville; 
northeast on Highway 70 to Highway 89; south on Highway 
89 to the new Gold Lake Road (near Graeagle); south 
on the new Gold Lake Road to Highway 49 at Bassetts; 
east on Highway 49 to Yuba Pass; south on the Yuba 
Pass-Webber Lake Road (main haul road) through Bonta 
Saddle to the Jackson Meadows Highway (Fiberboard 
Road); west on the Jackson Meadows Highway for two 
miles to the White Rock Lake Road; south on the White 
Rock Lake Road to the new road to White Rock Lake (be-
low Bear Valley); south and east on the new White Rock 
Lake Road to the Pacific Crest Trail (one mile west of White 
Rock Lake in section 21, T18N, R14E, M.D.B.M.); south and 
east on the Pacific Crest Trail to Interstate 80 near the 
Castle Peak-Boreal Ridge Summit; west on Interstate 80 
to Highway 20; west on Highway 20 to the Bear River in 
Bear Valley; west along the Bear River to Highway 65 near 
Wheatland; north on Highway 65 to Highway 70; north on 
Highway 70 to Highway 20 in Marysville; west on Highway 
20 to Interstate 5 at Williams; north on Interstate 5 to the 
point of beginning.
2. Zone D-4.
In those portions of Colusa, Nevada, Placer, Sacramento, 
Sutter, Yolo and Yuba counties within a line beginning at 
the junction of Interstate 5 and Highway 20 at Williams; 
east on Highway 20 to Highway 70 in Marysville; south 
on Highway 70 to Highway 65; south on Highway 65 to 
the Bear River (south of Wheatland); east along the Bear 
River to Highway 20; east on Highway 20 to Interstate 80; 
east on Interstate 80 to the Pacific Crest Trail near the 
Castle Peak-Boreal Ridge Summit; south on the Pacific 
Crest Trail to Forest Route 03 at Barker Pass; east and 
north along Forest Route 03 to Blackwood Canyon 
Road; east along Blackwood Canyon Road to Highway 
89 at Lake Tahoe near Idlewild; south on Highway 89 to 
Blackwood Creek; east on Blackwood Creek to the Lake 
Tahoe shoreline; south along the shore of Lake Tahoe to 
the mouth of Miller Creek and the common boundary 
between the Eldorado and Tahoe National Forests; west 
along Miller Creek to the Rubicon River; west along the 
Rubicon River through Hell Hole Reservoir to the Middle 
Fork of the American River; west along the Middle Fork of 
the American River to the American River; west along the 
American River to Interstate 5; north on Interstate 5 to the 
point of beginning.
3. Zone D-5.
In the counties of Amador and Calaveras and those 
portions of Alpine, El Dorado, Placer, Sacramento, San 
Joaquin, Stanislaus and Tuolumne counties within a line 
DEER HUNTING
=== page 44 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
44
beginning at the junction of Interstate 5 and the American 
River in Sacramento; east along the American River to the 
Middle Fork of the American River; northeast along the 
Middle Fork of the American River to the Rubicon River; 
east along the Rubicon River through Hell Hole Reservoir 
to its confluence with Miller Creek; east along Miller Creek 
to its junction with the new (marked) USFS Pacific Crest 
Trail; north on the Pacific Crest Trail one-quarter mile to a 
junction with the McKinney-Rubicon Springs Road (Miller 
Lake Road); east along the McKinney-Rubicon Springs 
Road to McKinney Creek (NE ¼, section 23, T14N, R16E, 
M.D.B.M.); east along McKinney Creek to the west shore-
line of Lake Tahoe near Chambers Lodge; south along 
the shore of Lake Tahoe to the California-Nevada state 
line; southeast along the California-Nevada state line to 
Highway 50; southwest on Highway 50 to the Pacific Crest 
Trail at Echo Summit; south along the Pacific Crest Trail 
to the township line between Townships 7 and 8 North 
near Wolf Creek Pass; due west on that township line to 
the road connecting Lower and Upper Highland Lakes at 
Lower Highland Lake; west along that road to Highland 
Creek; southwest along Highland Creek to the North Fork 
of the Stanislaus River; west along the North Fork of the 
Stanislaus River to the Stanislaus River; west along the 
Stanislaus River to Highway 99; north along Highway 99 
to Bus-80/Hwy 50; west on Bus-80/Hwy 50 to Interstate 5; 
north on Interstate 5 to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season for zones for D-3 through D-5 
shall open on the fourth Saturday in September and 
extend for 37 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 33,000. The Zone D-3-5 tag is valid in 
zones D-3, D-4, and D-5.
(5) Zone D-6.
(A) Area: In those portions of Alpine, Madera, Mariposa, 
Merced, Stanislaus and Tuolumne counties within 
a line beginning at the intersection of Highway 99 
and the Stanislaus River at Ripon; east along the 
Stanislaus River and following the North Fork of the 
Stanislaus River to Highland Creek; east up Highland 
Creek to the road connecting Lower and Upper 
Highland Lakes at Upper Highland Lake; east along 
that road to the township line between Townships 7 
and 8 North; east on that township line to the Sierra 
crest near Wolf Creek Pass; south along the Sierra 
crest to the Yosemite National Park boundary near 
Rodger Peak; along the eastern Yosemite National 
Park boundary to Highway 41; south along Highway 
41 to the Madera-Mariposa county line south of 
Westfall Station; along the Madera-Mariposa and 
the Madera-Merced county lines to Highway 99; 
north along Highway 99 to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone D-6 shall open on the 
third Saturday in September and extend for 44 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 10,000.
(6) Zone D-7.
Note: In 2026-2027, D-7 is part of the CWD Management 
Zone and hunters shall submit a CWD sample to CDFW 
within 10 days of harvest. Hunters are also encouraged 
to leave brain, spinal column, and gut pile at the 
harvest site.
(A) Area: In those portions of Fresno, Madera, Mariposa 
and Tulare counties within a line beginning at the 
intersection of Highway 99 and the Madera-Merced 
county line; northeast along the Madera-Merced 
and Madera-Mariposa county lines to Highway 41 
south of Westfall Station; north along Highway 41 to 
Yosemite National Park boundary; east along the 
park boundary to the Mono-Madera county line 
near Rodger Peak; south along the Inyo National 
Forest boundary (crest of the Ritter Range) to the 
junction of the Inyo National Forest boundary and 
Ashley Creek; east to Ashley Lake; northeast along 
Ashley Creek to the junction of King Creek; south-
east along King Creek to its junction with the middle 
fork of the San Joaquin River; south and west along 
the middle fork of the San Joaquin River to the junc-
tion of the Inyo National Forest boundary; east along 
Fish Creek to its confluence with Deer Creek; north 
and east along Deer Creek to the upper crossing 
of the Deer Creek trail; north and east along the 
Deer Creek trail to the Inyo National Forest Boundary 
(the Sierra Crest); south along the Sierra crest and 
the Inyo National Forest boundary to Bishop Pass; 
west along the Dusy Basin Trail to the Middle Fork of 
the Kings River; southwest and downstream along 
the Middle Fork of the Kings River to the junction of 
the Middle Fork and South Fork of the Kings River; 
southwest along the Kings River through Pine Flat 
Reservoir, Piedra and Reedley to Highway 99; north 
along Highway 99 to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone D-7 shall open on the 
third Saturday in September and extend for 44 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 9,000.
(7) Zone D-8.
(A) Area: In those portions of Fresno, Kern and Tulare 
counties within a line beginning at the intersection 
of Highway 99 and the Kings River; upstream and 
northeast along the Kings River through Reedley, 
Piedra and Pine Flat Reservoir to the junction of the 
Middle and South Forks of the Kings River; northeast 
DEER HUNTING
=== page 45 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
45
along the Middle Fork Kings River to the Dusy 
Basin Trail; east along this trail to the Kings Canyon 
National Park boundary at Bishop Pass; south along 
the Kings Canyon and Sequoia National Park 
boundaries to the Main Kern River; southeast along 
the Main Kern River and the common boundary 
between the Inyo and Sequoia National Forests to 
the end of the Chimney Meadow-Blackrock Station 
Road (Forest Road 21S03) near Blackrock Mountain; 
southeast along the Chimney Meadow-Blackrock 
Station Road through Troy Meadows to the South 
Fork of the Kern River; south along the South Fork of 
the Kern River to the Doyle Ranch Road; south along 
the Doyle Ranch Road to Highway 178 in the town 
of Onyx; southwest along Highway 178 to Highway 
99 at Bakersfield; north along Highway 99 to the 
point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone D-8 shall open on the 
fourth Saturday in September and extend for 30 
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 8,000.
(8) Zone D-9.
(A) Area: In that portion of Kern County within a line be-
ginning at the intersection of Highways 99 and 178; 
northeast along Highway 178 along Lake Isabella 
and through Walker Pass to Highway 14; southwest 
along Highway 14 to Highway 58; northwest along 
Highway 58 to Highway 99; north along Highway 99 
to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone D-9 shall open on the 
fourth Saturday in September and extend for 30 
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 2,000.
(9) Zone D-10.
(A) Area: In those portions of Kern and Los Angeles 
counties within a line beginning at the intersection 
of Highways 99 and 58; southeast along Highway 58 
to Highway 14; south along Highway 14 to Highway 
138; west along Highway 138 to Interstate 5; north on 
Interstate 5 to Highway 99; north on Highway 99 to 
the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone D-10 shall open on the 
fourth Saturday in September and extend for 30 
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 700.
(10) Zone D-11.
(A) Area: Those portions of Los Angeles and San 
Bernardino counties, within a line beginning at the 
intersection of Interstate 5 and Highway 138, south 
of Gorman; east on Highway 138 to Highway 14; 
south on Highway 14 to Palmdale and Highway 138; 
east on Highways 138 and 18 to Interstate 15; south 
on interstates 15 and 15E to Interstate 10; west on 
Interstate 10 to Interstate 405; north on Interstates 
405 and 5 to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone D-11 shall open on the 
second Saturday in October and extend for 30 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 5,500.
(E) Special Conditions: Hunters that possess a D-11 deer 
tag may also hunt in zones D-13 and D-15 as de-
scribed in subsections 360(a)(12)(A), (B) and (C), 
and subsections 360(a)(14)(A), (B) and (C).
(11) Zone D-12.
(A) Area: Those portions of Imperial, Riverside and 
San Bernardino counties within a line beginning 
at Highway 62 and the Twentynine Palms-Amboy 
Road in Twentynine Palms; east along Highway 62 
to Highway 95 at Vidal Junction; north on Highway 
95 to Interstate 40; east on Interstate 40 to the 
California-Arizona state line; south along this state 
line to the U.S.-Mexican border; west along the U.S.-
Mexican border to Highway 111 in Calexico; north 
on Highway 111 to Interstate 10; north and west 
on Interstate 10 to Highway 62; north and east on 
Highway 62 to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone D-12 shall open on the 
first Saturday in November and extend for 23 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 950.
(12) Zone D-13.
(A) Area: In those portions of Kern, Los Angeles, San Luis 
Obispo, Santa Barbara, and Ventura counties within 
a line beginning at the intersection of Highways 
99 and 166 at Mettler; south on Highway 99 and 
Interstate 5 to Highway 126; west on Highway 126 
to the crossing of Sespe Creek; north and then west 
along Sespe Creek to Highway 33; north on Highway 
33 to Highway 166; north and east on Highway 166 
to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone D-13 shall open on the 
second Saturday in October and extend for 30 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 4,000.
DEER HUNTING
=== page 46 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
46
(E) Special Conditions: Hunters that possess a D-13 deer 
tag may also hunt in zones D-11 and D-15 as de-
scribed in subsections 360(a)(10)(A), (B) and (C), 
and subsections 360(a)(14)(A), (B) and (C).
west along the U.S.-Mexican border to the Pacific 
Ocean; north along the shoreline to the point of 
beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone D-16 shall open on the 
fourth Saturday in October and extend for 30 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 3,000.
(16) Zone D-17.
(A) Area: Those portions of Inyo, Kern, Los Angeles 
and San Bernardino counties within a line begin-
ning at Highway 395 and the Kern-Inyo county line; 
east along the Kern-Inyo county line to the San 
Bernardino-Inyo county line; east along the San 
Bernardino-Inyo county line to Highway 127; north 
along Highway 127 to the California-Nevada state 
line; south along the California-Nevada state line 
to the California-Arizona state line; south along 
the California-Arizona state line to Interstate 40; 
Interstate 40 north to Needles; Highway 95 south to 
Highway 62; west on Highway 62 to Highway 247; 
northwest on Highway 247 to Highway 18; west on 
Highway 18 to Bear Valley Cutoff Road; west on 
Bear Valley Cutoff Road to Interstate 15; north on 
Interstate 15 to Highway 18; west on Highways 18 
and 138 to Highway 14; north on Highways 14 and 
395 to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone D-17 shall open on the 
second Saturday in October and extend for 23 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 500.
(17) Zone D-19.
(A) Area: Those portions of Imperial, Riverside and 
San Diego counties within a line beginning at the 
junction of Interstate 10 and Highway 79; south on 
Highway 79 to Hemet; south on County Road R-3 to 
Highway 79; south on Highway 79 to the Riverside-
San Diego county line; east on the Riverside-San 
Diego county line to the Anza-Borrego State Park 
boundary; south on the Anza-Borrego State Park 
boundary to Highway 78; east on Highway 78 to 
Highway 111; north on Highway 111 to the junction 
of Interstate 10 in Indio; west on Interstate 10 to the 
point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in D-19 shall open the first 
Saturday in October and extend for 30 consecutive 
days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 1,500.
DEER HUNTING
(13) Zone D-14.
(A) Area: In those portions of Riverside and San Bernardino 
counties within a line beginning at the junction of 
Interstates 10 and 15E; northwest on Interstates 15E 
and 15 through Cajon Pass to Bear Valley Cutoff 
Road; east on Bear Valley Cutoff Road to Highway 18; 
east along Highway 18 to Highway 247; southeast on 
Highway 247 to Highway 62; southwest on Highway 
62 to Interstate 10; west on Interstate 10 to the point of 
beginning.
(B) Seasons: The season in Zone D-14 shall open on the 
second Saturday in October and extend for 30 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 3,000.
(14) Zone D-15.
(A) Area: Including Santa Catalina Island, those portions 
of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino 
and San Diego counties within a line beginning 
at the Pacific Ocean and Interstate 10 in Santa 
Monica; east on Interstate 10 to Highway 79 at 
Beaumont; south on Highway 79 to Hemet; south on 
County Road R-3 through Sage to Highway 79; west 
on Highway 79 to Interstate 15; south on Interstate 
15 to Highway 76; west on Highway 76 to the Pacific 
Ocean; north along the shoreline to the point of 
beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone D-15 shall open on the 
second Saturday in October and extend for 30 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: one buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 1,500.
(E) Special Conditions: Hunters that possess a D-15 deer 
tag may also hunt in zones D-11 and D-13 as de-
scribed in subsections 360(a)(10)(A), (B) and (C), 
and subsections 360(a)(12)(A), (B) and (C).
(15) Zone D-16.
(A) Area: Those portions of Imperial, Riverside and San 
Diego counties within the line beginning at the 
Pacific Ocean and Highway 76; east on Highway 
76 to Interstate 15; north on Interstate 15 to Highway 
79; east on Highway 79 to the San Diego-Riverside 
county line; east along the San Diego-Riverside 
county line to the Anza-Borrego State Park boundary; 
south along the Anza-Borrego State Park boundary 
to Highway 78; east on Highway 78 to Highway 111; 
south on Highway 111 to the U.S.-Mexican border; 
=== page 47 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
47
(b) X-Zone Hunts.
(1) Zone X-1.
(A) Area: In those portions of Lassen, Modoc, Shasta 
and Siskiyou counties within a line beginning at the 
California-Oregon state line and its intersection with 
Highway 139; south on Highway 139 to the Lookout-
Hackamore Road; south on the Lookout-Hackamore 
Road to Highway 299; west on Highway 299 to the 
Pit River near Bieber; south and west on the Pit River 
to Highway 89 at Lake Britton; northwest on Highway 
89 to Interstate 5 at Mt. Shasta; north on Interstate 
5 to the junction of Highway 97 at Weed; north and 
east on Highway 97 to the California-Oregon state 
line; east on the California-Oregon state line to the 
point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-1 shall open on the first 
Saturday in October and extend for 16 consecutive 
days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 760.
(2) Zone X-2.
(A) Area: In those portions of Modoc and Siskiyou coun-
ties within a line beginning at the intersection of 
Highway 139 and the California-Oregon state line 
near Tulelake; east along the California-Oregon 
state line to the eastern shoreline of Goose Lake; 
southwest along the eastern shoreline of Goose 
Lake to Westside Road (Modoc County 48); south-
east along the Westside Road to Highway 395 in 
Davis Creek; south along Highway 395 to Highway 
299 in Alturas; west along Highway 299 to Highway 
139 near Canby; northwest along Highway 139 to 
the Oregon-California state line and the point of 
beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-2 shall open on the first 
Saturday in October and extend for 16 consecutive 
days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 190.
(3) Zone X-3a.
(A) Area: In those portions of Lassen and Modoc coun-
ties within a line beginning at the intersection of 
the Lookout-Hackamore Road and Highway 139; 
southeast on Highway 139 to Highway 299; east 
on Highway 299 to Highway 395 in Alturas; south 
on Highway 395 to the Termo-Grasshopper Road 
(Lassen County 513); west on the Termo-Grasshopper 
Road to Highway 139; south on Highway 139 to the 
Cleghorn Road (Lassen County 521); west and north 
on the Cleghorn Road to Lassen County Road 519 
near Coulthurst Flat; west on Lassen County Road 519 
to U.S. Forest Service Designated Through Route 22 
near Gooch Mountain; west and north on U.S. Forest 
Service Designated Through Route 22 to the Little 
Valley Road (Lassen County 404); north on the Little 
Valley Road to the Western Pacific Railroad; north-
east on the Western Pacific Railroad to Horse Creek; 
northwest on Horse Creek to the Pit River; north on 
the Pit River to Highway 299 at Bieber; northeast 
on Highway 299 to the Bieber-Lookout-Hackamore 
Road; north along the Bieber-Lookout-Hackamore 
Road to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-3a shall open on the first 
Saturday in October and extend for 16 consecutive 
days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 355.
(4) Zone X-3b.
(A) Area: In those portions of Lassen and Modoc counties 
within a line beginning at the east shoreline of Goose 
Lake and the California-Oregon state line; east along 
this state line to the California-Nevada state line; 
south along the California-Nevada state line to the 
Clarks Valley-Red Rock-Tuledad Road (Lassen County 
Roads 512, 510 and 506); west along the Tuledad Red 
Rock-Clarks Valley Road to Highway 395 at Madeline; 
north on Highway 395 to Westside Road (Modoc 
County 48) in Davis Creek; west and north along 
Westside Road to the south shoreline of Goose Lake; 
east and north along the south and east shoreline of 
Goose Lake to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-3b shall open on the 
first Saturday in October and extend for 16 consecu-
tive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 500.
(5) Zone X-4.
(A) Area: In those portions of Lassen and Shasta counties 
within a line beginning at the junction of Highways 
89 and 44 at Old Station; north on Highway 89 to the 
intersection with the Pit River at Lake Britton; east 
and south on the Pit River to Horse Creek; southeast 
on Horse Creek to the Burlington Northern Railroad; 
southwest on the Burlington Northern Railroad to 
the Little Valley Road (Lassen County 404); south 
on the Little Valley Road to U.S. Forest Service 
Designated Through Route 22; south and east on 
U.S. Forest Service Designated Through Route 22 
to Lassen County 519 near Gooch Mountain; east 
on Lassen County 519 to Cleghorn Road (Lassen 
County 521) near Coulthurst Flat; east on Cleghorn 
Road to Highway 139; south on Highway 139 to its 
crossing of Willow Creek in the Willow Creek Valley; 
DEER HUNTING
=== page 48 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
48
south (downstream) on Willow Creek to its crossing 
of Conservation Center Road (Lassen County A-27); 
west on Conservation Center Road to Highway 36; 
northwest on Highway 36 to the intersection with 
Highway 44; north and west on Highway 44 to the 
point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-4 shall open on the first 
Saturday in October and extend for 16 consecutive 
days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 480.
(6) Zone X-5a.
(A) Area: In that portion of Lassen County within a line 
beginning at the junction of Highway 395 and 
Conservation Center Road (Lassen County A-27) in 
the town of Litchfield; west on Conservation Center 
Road to its crossing of Willow Creek; northwest (up-
stream) on Willow Creek to its crossing of Highway 
139 in the Willow Creek Valley; north along Highway 
139 to the Termo-Grasshopper Road; east on the 
Termo-Grasshopper Road to Highway 395; south along 
Highway 395 to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-5a shall open on the 
first Saturday in October and extend for 16 consecu-
tive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 75.
(7) Zone X-5b.
(A) Area: That portion of Lassen County lying within the 
following line: Beginning at the junction of Highway 
395 and the Clarks Valley-Red Rock-Tuledad Road 
(Lassen County Roads 506, 510 and 512); east on 
the Clarks Valley-Red Rock-Tuledad Road to the 
California-Nevada state line; south on the California-
Nevada state line to the Pyramid Lake Road (Lassen 
County 320); west on the Pyramid Lake Road to 
Highway 395; north on Highway 395 to the point of 
beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-5b shall open on the 
first Saturday in October and extend for 16 consecu-
tive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 50.
(8) Zone X-6a.
(A) Area: In those portions of Lassen and Plumas 
counties within a line beginning at the junction of 
Highway 147 and Highway 36 near Westwood; east 
on Highway 36 to Conservation Center Road at 
Susanville (County Road A-27); east on Conservation 
Center Road to Highway 395 at the town of 
Litchfield; east on Highway 395 to the Wendel-
Pyramid Lake Road (County Road 320); east on 
the Wendel-Pyramid Lake Road to the Nevada-
California state line; south on the Nevada-California 
state line to the UP-WP railroad line near Herlong; 
west on the UP-WP railroad line to the Herlong 
Access Road (County Road A- 25) at Herlong; west 
on the Herlong Access Road to Highway 395; north 
on Highway 395 to County Road 336 at Milford; 
southwest on County Road 336 to U.S. Forest Service 
Road 26N16 near the Plumas-Lassen county line; 
west on Forest Service Road 26N16 to Forest Service 
Road 28N03 at Doyle Crossing; west on Forest 
Services Road 28N03 to Forest Service Road 29N43 
near Antelope Lake; south on Forest Service Road 
29N43 to County Road 111 at Flournoy Bridge; south 
on County Road 111 to Forest Service Road 24N08; 
south on Forest Service Road 24N08 to County Road 
112 at Lake Davis; south on County Road 112 to 
Highway 70; west on Highway 70 to the Highway 
89 junction at Blairsden; west on Highway 89/70 
to the Greenville Y west of Quincy; northwest on 
Highway 89 to Highway 147 at Canyon Dam; north 
on Highway 147 to the point of beginning.
(B) Seasons: The season in Zone X-6a shall open on the 
first Saturday in October and extend for 16 consecu-
tive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 330.
(9) Zone X-6b.
(A) Area: In those portions of Lassen and Plumas coun-
ties within a line beginning at the junction of County 
Road 336 and Highway 395 at Milford; south on 
Highway 395 to the junction of Highway 395 and 
the Herlong Access Road (County Road A-25); east 
on the Herlong Access Road to its junction with the 
UP-WP railroad line at Herlong; east on the UP-WP 
railroad line to the Nevada-California state line; south 
on the Nevada-California state line to the junction 
of the Nevada-California state line and Highway 
395 at Bordertown; northwest on Highway 395 to 
its junction at Highway 70; west on Highway 70 to 
its junction with County Road 112; north on County 
Road 112 to its junction with U.S. Forest Service Road 
24N08 at Lake Davis; north on Forest Service Road 
24N08 to its junction with County Road 111; north-
west on County Road 111 to its junction with Forest 
Service Road 29N43 at Flournoy Bridge; north on 
Forest Service Road 29N43 to Forest Service Road 
28N03 near Antelope Lake; southeast on Forest 
Service Road 28N03 to Forest Service Road 26N16 at 
Doyle Crossing; east on Forest Service Road 26N16 to 
County Road 336 near the Plumas-Lassen county line; 
north on County Road 336 to the point of beginning.
DEER HUNTING
=== page 49 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
49
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-6b shall open on the 
first Saturday in October and extend for 16 consecu-
tive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 310.
(10) Zone X-7a.
(A) Area: In those portions of Lassen, Nevada, Plumas 
and Sierra counties lying within a line beginning 
at the junction of Highway 395 and the California-
Nevada state line at Bordertown; south along the 
Long Valley Road (County Road S570) to its inter-
section with the Henness Pass Road (County Road 
S860); west on Henness Pass Road over Summit 2 to 
the intersection with County Road S450 (near Davies 
Creek at Stampede Reservoir); west on County 
Road S450 (the Henness Pass Road) through Kyburz 
Flat to its intersection with Highway 89; south on 
Highway 89 to its intersection with Interstate 80 at 
Truckee; west on Interstate 80 to the Pacific Crest 
Trail near the Castle Peak-Boreal Ridge Summit; 
north on the Pacific Crest Trail to the new road 
to White Rock Lake (one mile west of White Rock 
Lake in section 21, T18N, R14E, M.D.B.M.); north on 
the new White Rock Lake Road below Bear Valley 
to the White Rock Lake Road; north on the White 
Rock Lake Road to the Jackson Meadows Highway 
(Fiberboard Road); east two miles on the Jackson 
Meadows Highway to the Yuba Pass Road at 
Webber Lake; north on the Yuba Pass Road (main 
haul road) through Bonta Saddle to Highway 49 at 
Yuba Pass; west on Highway 49 to the new Gold 
Lake Road at Bassetts; north on the new Gold 
Lake Road to Highway 89 near Graeagle; north 
on Highway 89 to Highway 70; east on Highway 
70 to Highway 395 at Hallelujah Junction; south on 
Highway 395 to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-7a shall open on the 
first Saturday in October and extend for 16 consecu-
tive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 230.
(11) Zone X-7b.
(A) Area: In those portions of Nevada, Placer and Sierra 
counties lying within a line beginning at the junc-
tion of Highway 395 and the California-Nevada 
state line at Bordertown; south along the California-
Nevada state line to the shore of Lake Tahoe; west 
and south along the shore of Lake Tahoe to the 
mouth of Blackwood Creek near Idlewild; west on 
Blackwood Creek to Highway 89; north on Highway 
89 to Blackwood Canyon Road; Blackwood Canyon 
Road near Idlewild; west along Blackwood Canyon 
Road to Forest Route 03; west and south along 
Forest Route 03 to the Pacific Crest Trail at Barker 
Pass; north on the Pacific Crest Trail to its intersec-
tion with Interstate 80 near the Castle Peak-Boreal 
Ridge Summit; east on Interstate 80 to its intersection 
with Highway 89 at Truckee; north on Highway 89 to 
County Road S450 (the Henness Pass Road, a.k.a. 
the Kyburz Flat Road); east on County Road S450 
to its intersection with County Road S860 (continu-
ation of Henness Pass Road) near Davies Creek at 
Stampede Reservoir; east on County Road S860, 
over Summit 2 to the junction with County Road S570 
(the Long Valley Road); north on County Road S570 
to Bordertown at the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-7b shall open on the 
first Saturday in October and extend for 16 consecu-
tive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 135.
(12) Zone X-8.
(A) Area: In those portions of Alpine and El Dorado 
counties within a line beginning at the junction of 
the California-Nevada state line and Highway 50; 
southeast along the California-Nevada state line to 
the Indian Springs Road, south to the Alpine-Mono 
County line; south along the Alpine-Mono county 
line to the Sierra crest; northwest along the Sierra 
crest to the intersection with the Pacific Crest Trail 
near Wolf Creek Pass; northwest along the Pacific 
Crest Trail to Highway 50 at Echo Summit; northeast 
on Highway 50 to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-8 shall open on the 
fourth Saturday in September and extend for 16 
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 210.
(13) Zone X-9a.
Note: In 2026-2027,X-9a is part of the CWD 
Management Zone and hunters shall submit a CWD 
sample to CDFW within 10 days of harvest. Hunters are 
also encouraged to leave brain, spinal column, and gut 
pile at the harvest site.
(A) Area: In those portions of Fresno, Inyo, Madera and 
Mono counties within a line beginning at the inter-
section of Highway 6 and the California-Nevada 
state line; south along Highway 6 to its junction with 
Highway 395; south along Highway 395 to its junction 
with Highway 168; west and south along Highway 
168 to the North Lake Road turnoff; west along the 
North Lake Road and the Piute Pass Trail to the Sierra 
Crest (Inyo National Forest Boundary); north along 
DEER HUNTING
=== page 50 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
50
the Inyo National Forest Boundary to the Deer Creek 
Trail; south and west along the Deer Creek Trail to 
the upper crossing of Deer Creek; west and south 
along Deer Creek to its confluence with Fish Creek; 
west along Fish Creek to its confluence with the 
middle fork of the San Joaquin River; north along the 
middle fork of the San Joaquin River to the junction 
of King Creek; west along King Creek to the junction 
of Ashley Creek; west along Ashley Creek to Ashley 
Lake; continue west along Ashley Creek to the 
junction of the Inyo National Forest boundary; north 
along the Inyo National Forest Boundary (the crest of 
the Ritter Range) to the Mono-Madera county line; 
north along the Mono-Madera county line to Mono-
Tuolumne county line; north on the Mono-Tuolumne 
county line to the Virginia Lakes Trail (Entry Trail 
D-11); east along Virginia Lakes Trail to Virginia Lakes 
Road; east along Virginia Lakes Road to Highway 
395; south along Highway 395 to Highway 167; east 
on Highway 167 to the California-Nevada state line; 
southeast on the California-Nevada state line to the 
point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-9a shall open on the 
third Saturday in September and extend for 24 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 270.
(14) Zone X-9b.
Note: In 2026-2027, X-9b is part of the CWD 
Management Zone and hunters shall submit a CWD 
sample to CDFW within 10 days of harvest. Hunters are 
also encouraged to leave brain, spinal column, and gut 
pile at the harvest site.
(A) Area: That portion of Inyo County within a line 
beginning at the intersection of Highway 395 and 
Cottonwood Creek; northwest along Cottonwood 
Creek to the Horseshoe Meadow Road; south along 
the Horseshoe Meadow Road to the Cottonwood 
Pass Trail; west along the Cottonwood Pass Trail 
through Horseshoe Meadow to the Inyo-Tulare 
county line at Cottonwood Pass; north on the Inyo-
Tulare and the Inyo-Fresno county lines to the Piute 
Pass Trail; east along the Piute Pass Trail to the North 
Lake Road; east and south on the North Lake Road 
to Highway 168; north and east on Highway 168 to 
Highway 395; south on Highway 395 to the point of 
beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-9b shall open on the 
third Saturday in September and extend for 24 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 230.
(15) Zone X-9c.
Note: In 2026-2027, X-9c is part of the CWD 
Management Zone and hunters shall submit a CWD 
sample to CDFW within 10 days of harvest. Hunters are 
also encouraged to leave brain, spinal column, and gut 
pile at the harvest site.
(A) Area: In those portions of Inyo and Mono coun-
ties within a line beginning at Highway 395 and the 
Kern-Inyo county line; north along Highway 395 to 
Highway 6; north on Highway 6 to the California-
Nevada state line; southeast along the California-
Nevada state line to Highway 127; south along 
Highway 127 to the Inyo-San Bernardino county line; 
west along the Inyo-San Bernardino county line to 
the Kern-Inyo county line; west along the Kern-Inyo 
county line to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-9c shall open on the 
third Saturday in October and extend for 23 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 325.
(16) Zone X-10.
(A) Area: In those portions of Kern, Tulare and Inyo coun-
ties within a line beginning at the intersection of 
Highway 178 and the Doyle Ranch Road in the town 
of Onyx; north along the Doyle Ranch Road to the 
South Fork of the Kern River; north along the South 
Fork of the Kern River to the Chimney Meadow-
Blackrock Station Road (Forest Road 21S03); north-
west along the Chimney Meadow-Blackrock Station 
Road through Troy Meadows to the road’s end at 
the Inyo and Sequoia National Forest boundary 
near Blackrock Mountain; northwest along the Inyo 
and Sequoia National Forest boundary to the main 
Kern River; northwest along the main Kern River to 
the Sequoia National Park boundary; northeast 
along the Sequoia National Park boundary to the 
Inyo-Tulare county line; southeast along the Inyo-
Tulare county line to the Cottonwood Pass Trail at 
Cottonwood Pass; east along the Cottonwood Pass 
Trail through Horseshoe Meadow to the Horseshoe 
Meadow Road; north along the Horseshoe Meadow 
Road to Cottonwood Creek; southeast along 
Cottonwood Creek to Highway 395; south along 
Highway 395 to Highway 14; south along Highway 14 
to Highway 178; north and west along Highway 178 
to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-10 shall open on 
the last Saturday in September and extend for 16 
DEER HUNTING
=== page 51 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
51
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(See subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 400.
(17) Zone X-12.
(A) Area: That portion of Mono County within a line 
beginning at the junction of the California-Nevada 
state line and Highway 167 (Pole Line Road); west on 
Highway 167 to Highway 395; north on Highway 395 
to Virginia Lakes Road; west on Virginia Lakes Road 
to the Virginia Lakes Trail (Entry Trail D11); northwest 
on the Virginia Lakes Trail to the Mono-Tuolumne 
county line; north along the Mono-Tuolumne county 
line to the Mono-Alpine county line; northeast along 
the Mono-Alpine county line to Indian Springs Road; 
northeast on Indian Springs Road to the California-
Nevada state line; southeast on the California-
Nevada state line to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season in Zone X-12 shall open on the 
third Saturday in September and extend for 24 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351 (a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 350.
(c) Additional Hunts.
(1) G-1 (Late Season Buck Hunt for Zone C-4).
(A) Area: Those portions of Butte, Glenn, Lassen, Plumas, 
Shasta, and Tehama counties within the area de-
scribed as Zone C-4 (see subsection 360(a)(3)(A)4.).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-1 (Late 
Season Buck Hunt for Zone C-4) shall open on the 
fourth Saturday in October and extend for 9 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 2,710.
(2) G-3 (Goodale Buck Hunt).
Note: In 2026-2027, G-3 is part of the CWD Management 
Zone and hunters shall submit a CWD sample to CDFW 
within 10 days of harvest. Hunters are also encouraged 
to leave brain, spinal column, and gut pile at the 
harvest site.
(A) Area: In that portion of Inyo County within a line be-
ginning at the intersection of Highway 395 and Lone 
Pine Creek; west along Lone Pine Creek to the Inyo-
Tulare county line; northwest along the Inyo-Tulare 
and Inyo-Fresno county lines to Taboose Creek; east 
along Taboose Creek to Highway 395; south along 
Highway 395 to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-3 (Goodale 
Buck Hunt) shall open on the first Saturday in 
December and extend for 16 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 25.
(3) G-6 (Kern River Deer Herd Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: In those portions of Kern and Tulare counties 
lying within a line beginning at the intersection of 
County Road 521 and County Road 495 at Kernville; 
south on County Road 495 to the intersection of 
Highway 155 at Wofford Heights; west on Highway 
155 to the intersection of U.S. Forest Service Road 
24S15 at Greenhorn Summit; north on U.S. Forest 
Service Road 24S15 to the intersection of U.S. Forest 
Service Road 23S16 (near Portuguese Pass); north-
east on U.S. Forest Service Road 23S16 to County 
Road SM50; west on County Road SM50 to the 
intersection of the Western Divide Highway (County 
Road SM107); north on County Road SM107 to the 
junction of U.S. Forest Service Road 21S50 (near 
Quaking Aspen Campground); north on U.S. Forest 
Service Road 21S50 to the junction of U.S. Forest 
Service Road 20S79; northeast on U.S. Forest Service 
Road 20S79 to the junction of U.S. Forest Service 
Road 20S53; northeast on U.S. Forest Service Road 
20S53 to the Golden Trout Wilderness boundary (at 
Lewis Camp Trail Head); east on the Golden Trout 
Wilderness Boundary to Rattlesnake Creek; south-
east on Rattlesnake Creek to U.S. Forest Service 
Road 22S05; south on U.S. Forest Service Road 22S05 
to the Dome Land Wilderness Boundary; southwest 
on the Dome Land Wilderness Boundary to the 
intersection of the South Fork of the Kern River; south 
along the South Fork of the Kern River to the inter-
section of County Road 521; west on County Road 
521 to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-6 (Kern 
River Deer Herd Buck Hunt) shall open on the first 
Saturday in December and extend for 9 consecutive 
days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 50.
(4) G-7 (Beale Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Yuba County lying within the 
exterior boundaries of Beale Air Force Base.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-7 (Beale 
Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall open on the third 
Saturday in August and extend for 79 consecutive 
days, except if rescheduled by the Commanding 
Officer with Department concurrence between the 
season opener and December 31.
DEER HUNTING
=== page 52 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
52
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 20 (military only).
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only shotguns with single slugs or muzzleloading rifles, 
crossbows, and archery equipment as specified in 
sections 353 and 354 may be used.
2. In the event the Commanding Officer cancels the 
hunt, G-7 tagholders may exchange the unused tag 
for any remaining deer tag and have accumulated 
and earned preference points restored pursuant to 
Section 708.14.
(5) G-8 (Fort Hunter Liggett Antlerless Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Monterey County lying within 
the exterior boundaries of the Hunter Liggett 
Military Reservation, except as restricted by the 
Commanding Officer.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-8 (Fort 
Hunter Liggett Antlerless Deer Hunt) shall open on 
the first Saturday in October and continue for two 
(2) consecutive days and reopen on the second 
Saturday in October and continue for three (3) 
consecutive days, except if rescheduled by the 
Commanding Officer with Department concurrence 
between the season opener and December 31.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One antlerless deer (see 
subsection 351(b)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 20.
(E) Special Conditions: In the event the Commanding 
Officer cancels the hunt, G-8 tagholders may ex-
change the unused tag for any remaining deer tag 
and have accumulated and earned preference 
points restored pursuant to Section 708.14.
(6) G-9 (Camp Roberts Antlerless Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of San Luis Obispo County lying 
within the exterior boundaries of Camp Roberts, ex-
cept as restricted by the Commanding Officer.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-9 (Camp 
Roberts Antlerless Deer Hunt) shall open the last 
Monday in August and extend for 8 consecutive 
days, except if rescheduled by the Commanding 
Officer with Department concurrence between the 
season opener and December 31.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One antlerless deer (see 
subsection 351(b)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 0
(E) Special Conditions: In the event the Commanding 
Officer cancels the hunt, G-9 tagholders may ex-
change the unused tag for any remaining deer tag 
and have accumulated and earned preference 
points restored pursuant to Section 708.14.
(7) G-10 (Camp Pendleton Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of San Diego County lying within 
the exterior boundaries of the U.S. Marine Corps 
Base, Camp Joseph Pendleton.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-10 (Camp 
Pendleton Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall be open 
on Saturdays, Sundays, holidays and the day af-
ter Thanksgiving beginning the first Saturday in 
September and extending through the first Sunday 
in December. Season dates may be subject to 
further restriction, or additional hunt days sched-
uled with concurrence from the Department, be-
tween the season opener and December 31 by the 
Commanding Officer due to military operations.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 250 (military only).
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only archery equipment is permitted during the first six 
weeks of the season.
2. Hunting with firearms is permitted beginning on the 
seventh weekend through the end of season.
3. A permit fee and method of take registration with the 
Base may be required.
4. In the event the Commanding Officer cancels the 
hunt, G-10 tagholders may exchange the unused 
tag for any remaining deer tag and have accumu-
lated and earned preference points restored pursu-
ant to Section 708.14.
(8) G-11 (Vandenberg Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Santa Barbara County lying 
within the exterior boundaries of Vandenberg Air 
Force Base.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-11 
(Vandenberg Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall open on 
the last Monday in August and extend through 
October 1.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 200 (military, Department of 
Defense employees, and personnel authorized by 
the Installation Commander only).
(E) Special Conditions: In the event the Commanding 
Officer cancels the hunt, G-11 tagholders may ex-
change the unused tag for any remaining deer tag 
and have accumulated and earned preference 
points restored pursuant to Section 708.14.
(9) G-12 (Gray Lodge Shotgun Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: Those portions of Butte and Sutter counties 
within the exterior boundaries of the Gray Lodge 
State Wildlife Area.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-12 (Gray 
Lodge Shotgun Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall open on 
the third Saturday in September and extend for nine 
DEER HUNTING
=== page 53 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
53
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 30.
(E) Special Conditions: Only shotguns and ammunition 
as specified in Section 353 may be used.
(10) G-13 (San Diego Antlerless Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of San Diego County within Zone 
D-16 (see subsection 360(a)(15)(A)).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-13 (San 
Diego Antlerless Deer Hunt) shall open on the fourth 
Saturday in October and extend for 23 consecutive 
days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One antlerless deer (see 
subsection 351(b)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 300.
(11) G-19 (Sutter-Yuba Wildlife Areas Either-Sex Deer 
Hunt).
(A) Area: Those portions of Yuba and Sutter counties 
within the exterior boundaries of: (1) the Feather 
River Wildlife Area, and (2) the Sutter Bypass Wildlife 
Area (as defined in Section 551, Title 14, CCR).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-19 (Sutter-
Yuba Wildlife Areas Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall open 
on the fourth Saturday in September and extend 
through December 31.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 25.
(E) Special Conditions: Only archery equipment and 
crossbows (as specified in Section 354) and shotguns 
and ammunition (as specified in Section 353) may 
be used.
(12) G-21 (Ventana Wilderness Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Monterey County and the Los 
Padres National Forest within the exterior boundaries 
of the Ventana Wilderness Area.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-21 
(Ventana Wilderness Buck Hunt) shall open on the 
second Saturday in November and extend for 23 
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 25.
(13) G-37 (Anderson Flat Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: In that portion of hunt Zone D-6 in Mariposa 
and Tuolumne counties lying within a line beginning 
at the intersection of Highway 140 and Bull Creek 
Road at Briceburg; north on Bull Creek Road (U.S. 
Forest Service Road 2S05) to Greeley Hill Road; west 
on Greeley Hill Road to Smith Station Road (County 
Route J20); north on Smith Station Road to Highway 
120 (near Burch Meadow); east on Highway 120 
to the Yosemite National Park Boundary (near 
Big Oak-Flat Ranger Station); southeast along the 
Yosemite National Park Boundary to Highway 140; 
west on Highway 140 to the Yosemite National 
Park Boundary; northwest along the Yosemite 
National Park Boundary to Highway 140 (at Redbud 
Campground); west on Highway 140 to the point of 
beginning.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-37 
(Anderson Flat Buck Hunt) shall open on the fourth 
Saturday in November and extend for nine consecu-
tive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 25.
(14) G-38 (X-10 Late Season Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: In those portions of Kern, Tulare, and Inyo 
counties within a line beginning at the intersection of 
Highway 178 and the Doyle Ranch Road in the town 
of Onyx; north along the Doyle Ranch Road to the 
South Fork of the Kern River; north along the South 
Fork of the Kern River to the Chimney Meadow-
Blackrock Station Road (Forest Road 21S03); north-
west along the Chimney Meadow-Blackrock Station 
Road through Troy Meadows to the road’s end at 
the Inyo and Sequoia National Forest boundary 
near Blackrock Mountain; northwest along the Inyo 
and Sequoia National Forest boundary to the main 
Kern River; northwest along the main Kern River to 
the Sequoia National Park boundary; northeast 
along the Sequoia National Park boundary to the 
Inyo-Tulare county line; southeast along the Inyo-
Tulare county line to the Cottonwood Pass Trail at 
Cottonwood Pass; east along the Cottonwood Pass 
Trail through Horseshoe Meadow to the Horseshoe 
Meadow Road; north along the Horseshoe Meadow 
Road to Cottonwood Creek; southeast along 
Cottonwood Creek to Highway 395; south along 
Highway 395 to Highway 14; south along Highway 14 
to Highway 178; north and west along Highway 178 
to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-38 (X-10 
Late Season Buck Hunt) shall open on the third 
Saturday in October and extend for 16 consecutive 
days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 300.
(15) G-39 (Round Valley Late Season Buck Hunt).
Note: In 2026-2027, G-39 is part of the CWD 
Management Zone and hunters shall submit a CWD 
sample to CDFW within 10 days of harvest. Hunters are 
DEER HUNTING
=== page 54 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
54
also encouraged to leave brain, spinal column, and gut 
pile at the harvest site.
(A) Area: In that portion of Inyo and Mono counties within 
a line beginning at the intersection of U.S. Highway 
395 and California Highway 168; west and south 
along Highway 168 to the North Lake Road turnoff; 
west along the North Lake Road and the Piute Pass 
Trail to the Inyo-Fresno county line; north along the 
Inyo-Fresno county line to the Mono-Fresno county 
line; north along the Mono-Fresno and Mono-Madera 
county lines to the junction of the Mono-Madera 
county line and California Highway 203 at Minaret 
Summit; southeast along Highway 203 to its junction 
with Highway 395; south along Highway 395 to the 
point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-39 (Round 
Valley Late Season Buck Hunt) shall open on the 
fourth Saturday in October and extend for 16 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 2.
(16) G-40 (D-7 Late Season Buck Hunt)
Note: In 2026-2027, G-40 is part of the CWD 
Management Zone and hunters shall submit a CWD 
sample to CDFW within 10 days of harvest. Hunters are 
also encouraged to leave brain, spinal column, and gut 
pile at the harvest site.
(A) Area: That portion of Madera County within the area 
described as D-7 (see subsection 360(a)(6)(A)).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt G-40 (D-7 
Late Season Buck Hunt) shall open on the fourth 
Saturday in November and extend for nine consecu-
tive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: [0-50].
(17) M-3 (Doyle Muzzleloading Rifle Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Lassen County within the area 
described as X-6b (see subsection 360(b)(9)(A)).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt M-3 (Doyle 
Muzzleloading Rifle Buck Hunt) shall open on the 
third Saturday in November and extend for nine 
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 20.
(E) Special Conditions: Only muzzleloading rifles as 
specified in Section 353 may be used.
(18) M-4 (Horse Lake Muzzleloading Rifle Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Lassen County within the area 
described as X5a (see subsection 360(b)(6)(A)).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt M-4 (Horse 
Lake Muzzleloading Rifle Buck Hunt) shall open on 
the fourth Saturday in October and extend for nine 
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 10.
(E) Special Conditions: Only muzzleloading rifles as 
specified in Section 353 may be used.
(19) M-5 (East Lassen Muzzleloading Rifle Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Lassen County within the area 
described as X-5b (see subsection 360(b)(7)(A)).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt M-5 (East 
Lassen Muzzleloading Rifle Buck Hunt) shall open on 
the fourth Saturday in October and extend for nine 
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 5.
(E) Special Conditions: Only muzzleloading rifles as 
specified in Section 353 may be used.
(20) M-6 (San Diego Muzzleloading Rifle Either-Sex Deer 
Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of San Diego County within Zone 
D-16 (see subsection 360(a)(15)(A)).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt M-6 (San 
Diego Muzzleloading Rifle Either-Sex Deer Hunt) 
shall open on the third Saturday in December and 
extend through December 31.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 80.
(E) Special Conditions: Only muzzleloading rifles as 
specified in Section 353 may be used.
(21) M-7 (Ventura Muzzleloading Rifle Either-Sex Deer 
Hunt).
(A) Area: All of Ventura County.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt M-7 (Ventura 
Muzzleloading Rifle Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall open 
on the last Saturday in November and extend for 16 
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 150.
(E) Special Conditions: Only muzzleloading rifles as 
specified in Section 353 may be used.
(22) M-8 (Bass Hill Muzzleloading Rifle Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Lassen County within the area 
described as Zone X-6a (see subsection 360(b)(8)
(A)).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt M-8 (Bass Hill 
DEER HUNTING
=== page 55 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
55
Muzzleloading Rifle Buck) shall open on the fourth 
Saturday in October and extend for 9 consecutive 
days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 20.
(E) Special Conditions: Only muzzleloading rifles as 
specified in Section 353 may be used.
(23) M-9 (Devil’s Garden Muzzleloading Rifle Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Modoc County within a line 
beginning at the intersection of the Malin Road 
(Modoc County 114) and the California/Oregon 
state line; east along the state line to the Crowder 
Flat Road; south along the Crowder Flat Road to 
the Blue Mountain Road (Modoc County 136); west 
on the Blue Mountain Road to the Blue Mountain-
Mowitz Butte-Ambrose Road; south on the Blue 
Mountain-Mowitz Butte-Ambrose Road to Highway 
139; north on Highway 139 to the Malin Road; north 
on the Malin Road to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt M-9 (Devil’s 
Garden Muzzleloading Rifle Buck Hunt) shall open 
on the fourth Saturday in October and extend for 16 
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 15.
(E) Special Conditions: Only muzzleloading rifles as 
specified in Section 353 may be used.
(24) M-11 (Northwestern California Muzzleloading Rifle 
Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: Those portions of Del Norte, Glenn, Humboldt, 
Lake, Mendocino, Siskiyou, and Trinity counties within 
the area described as Zone B-1 (see subsection 
360(a)(2)(A)1.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt M-11 
(Northwestern California Muzzleloading Rifle Buck 
Hunt) shall open on the second Saturday in November 
and extend for 16 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 20.
(E) Special Conditions: Only muzzleloading rifles as 
specified in Section 353 may be used.
(25) MA-1 (San Luis Obispo Muzzleloading Rifle/Archery 
Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of San Luis Obispo County lying 
within the Los Padres National Forest.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt MA-1 (San 
Luis Obispo Muzzleloading Rifle/Archery Either-Sex 
Deer Hunt) shall open the last Saturday in November 
and extend for 16 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 150.
(E) Special Conditions: Only archery equipment as 
specified in Section 354 or muzzleloading rifles as 
specified in Section 353 may be used.
(26) MA-3 (Santa Barbara Muzzleloading Rifle/Archery 
Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: All of Santa Barbara County.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt MA-3 (Santa 
Barbara Muzzleloading Rifle/Archery Buck Hunt) shall 
open on the last Saturday in November and extend 
for 16 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 150.
(E) Special Conditions: Only muzzleloading rifles as 
specified in Section 353 and archery equipment as 
specified in Section 354 may be used.
(27) J-1 (Lake Sonoma Apprentice Either-Sex Deer 
Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Sonoma County within the 
boundaries of the Lake Sonoma Area, U.S. Army 
Corps of Engineers (COE) property described as 
follows: Beginning at the intersection of Hot Springs 
Road and the COE boundary; east and south along 
the boundary line to the intersection with Brush 
Creek; west along the north bank of Brush Creek 
(shoreline) to the Dry Creek arm of Lake Sonoma; 
south along the shoreline of the Dry Creek arm to 
Smittle Creek; north along the COE property line 
to Dry Creek; east along the COE boundary across 
Cherry Creek, Skunk Creek, and Yorty Creek to the 
point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-1 (Lake 
Sonoma Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall open 
on the first Saturday in November and extend for 
two consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 25.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult chap-
eron 18 years of age or older while hunting.
3. Tagholders shall attend an orientation meeting the 
day before the opening day of the season.
4. The use of dogs is prohibited.
5.  Boats are required for all areas west of Cherry Creek 
(2/3 of the hunt area). Only cartop boats are 
DEER HUNTING
=== page 56 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
56
allowed to launch from the Yorty Creek access.
(28) J-3 (Tehama Wildlife Area Apprentice Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Tehama County within the 
boundaries of the Tehama Wildlife Area.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-3 (Tehama 
Wildlife Area Apprentice Buck Hunt) shall open on 
the last Saturday in November and extend for 2 
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 15.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult chap-
eron 18 years of age or older while hunting.
3. Tagholders shall attend an orientation meeting the 
day before the opening day of the season.
(29) J-4 (Shasta-Trinity Apprentice Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: In those portions of Shasta and Trinity coun-
ties beginning at the junction of Highway 3 and 
Highway 299 in Weaverville; north on Highway 3 to 
the East Side Road at the north end of Trinity Lake; 
east on the East Side Road to Dog Creek Road; east 
on Dog Creek Road to Interstate 5 at Vollmers; south 
on Interstate 5 to Shasta Lake; south along the west 
shore of Shasta Lake to Shasta Dam; south along 
Shasta Dam along the Sacramento River to Keswick 
Dam Road; west on Keswick Dam Road to Rock 
Creek Road; south on Rock Creek Road to Highway 
299; west on Highway 299 to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-4 (Shasta-
Trinity Apprentice Buck Hunt) shall open on the 
fourth Saturday in November and extend for nine 
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 15.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult chap-
eron 18 years of age or older while hunting.
(30) J-7 (Carson River Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Alpine County within the area 
described as Zone X-8 (see subsection 360(b)(12)
(A)).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-7 (Carson 
River Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall open 
on the first Saturday following the closure of the X-8 
general season (see subsection 360(b)(12)(B)) and 
extend for 9 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 0.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult chap-
eron 18 years of age or older while hunting.
(31) J-8 (Daugherty Hill Wildlife Area Apprentice Either-
Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Yuba County within the exterior 
boundaries of the Daugherty Hill Wildlife Area (as 
defined in Section 551, Title 14, CCR).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-8 
(Daugherty Hill Wildlife Area Apprentice Either-
Sex Deer Hunt) shall open on the first Saturday in 
December and extend through December 31.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 15.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult chap-
eron 18 years of age or older while hunting.
(32) J-9 (Little Dry Creek Apprentice Shotgun Either-Sex 
Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Butte County within the exterior 
boundaries of the Little Dry Creek Unit Upper Butte 
Basin Wildlife Area (as defined in Section 551, Title 
14, CCR).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-9 (Little Dry 
Creek Apprentice Shotgun Either-Sex Deer Hunt) 
shall open on the third Saturday in September and 
extend for 9 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)), per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 5.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult chap-
eron 18 years of age or older while hunting.
3. Tagholders shall attend an orientation meeting the 
day before the opening day of the season.
4. Only shotguns and ammunition as specified in Section 
353 may be used.
(33) J-10 (Fort Hunter Liggett Apprentice Either-Sex Deer 
DEER HUNTING
=== page 57 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
57
DEER HUNTING
Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Monterey County lying within 
the exterior boundaries of the Fort Hunter Liggett 
Military Reservation, except as restricted by the 
Commanding Officer.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-10 (Fort 
Hunter Liggett Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall 
open on the first Saturday in October and continue 
for two (2) consecutive days and reopen on the 
second Saturday of October and continue for three 
(3) consecutive days, except if rescheduled by the 
Commanding Officer with Department concurrence 
between the season opener and December 31.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 30.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult chap-
eron 18 years of age or older while hunting.
3. Tagholders shall attend an orientation meeting the 
day before the opening day of the season.
4. In the event the Commanding Officer cancels the 
hunt, J-10 tagholders may exchange the unused tag 
for any remaining deer tag and have accumulated 
and earned preference points restored pursuant to 
Section 708.14.
(34) J-11 (San Bernardino Apprentice Either-Sex Deer 
Hunt).
(A) Area: In those portions of Zone D-14 within San 
Bernardino County (see subsection 360(a)(13)(A).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-11 (San 
Bernardino Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall 
open on the third Saturday in November and extend 
for 9 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 40.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult chap-
eron 18 years of age or older while hunting.
(35) J-12 (Round Valley Apprentice Buck Hunt).
Note: In 2026-2027, J-12 is part of the CWD 
Management Zone and hunters shall submit a CWD 
sample to CDFW within 10 days of harvest. Hunters are 
also encouraged to leave brain, spinal column, and gut 
pile at the harvest site.
(A) Area: In that portion of Inyo and Mono counties 
within a line beginning at the intersection of U.S. 
Highway 395 and California Highway 168; west and 
south along Highway 168 to the North Lake Road 
turnoff; west along the North Lake Road and the 
Paiute Pass Trail to the Inyo-Fresno county line; north 
along the Inyo-Fresno county line to the Mono-
Fresno county line; north along the Mono-Fresno and 
Mono-Madera county lines to the junction of the 
Mono-Madera county line and California Highway 
203 at Minaret Summit; southeast along Highway 
203 to its junction with Highway 395; south along 
Highway 395 to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-12 (Round 
Valley Apprentice Buck Hunt) shall open on the first 
Saturday in December and extend for 16 consecu-
tive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 10.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult chap-
eron 18 years of age or older while hunting.
(36) J-13 (Los Angeles Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: In that portion of Los Angeles County within 
Zone D-11 (see subsection 360(a)(10)(A)).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-13 (Los 
Angeles Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall open 
on the third Saturday in November and extend for 9 
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 40.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult chap-
eron 18 years of age or older while hunting.
(37) J-14 (Riverside Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: In that portion of Riverside County within Zone 
D-19 (see subsection 360(a)(17)(A)).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-14 (Riverside 
Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall open on the 
third Saturday in November and extend for 9 con-
secutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 30.
(E) Special Conditions:
=== page 58 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
58
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult chap-
eron 18 years of age or older while hunting.
(38) J-15 (Anderson Flat Apprentice Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: In that portion of Zone D-6 in Mariposa and 
Tuolumne counties lying within a line beginning at 
the intersection of Highway 140 and Bull Creek Road 
at Briceburg; north on Bull Creek Road (U.S. Forest 
Service Road 2S05) to Greeley Hill Road; west on 
Greeley Hill Road to Smith Station Road (County 
Route J20); north on Smith Station Road to Highway 
120 (near Burch Meadow); east on Highway 120 
to the Yosemite National Park Boundary (near 
Big Oak-Flat Ranger Station); southeast along the 
Yosemite National Park Boundary to Highway 140; 
west on Highway 140 to the Yosemite National 
Park Boundary; northwest along the Yosemite 
National Park Boundary to Highway 140 (at Redbud 
Campground); west on Highway 140 to the point of 
beginning.
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-15 
(Anderson Flat Apprentice Buck Hunt) shall open 
on the fourth Saturday in November and extend for 
nine consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 10.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult chap-
eron 18 years of age or older while hunting.
(39) J-16 (Bucks Mountain-Nevada City Apprentice 
Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: Excluding Butte, Colusa and Glenn Counties, 
in those portions of Nevada, Placer, Plumas, Sierra, 
Sutter and Yuba Counties within the area described 
as zone D-3 (see subsection 360(a)(4)(A)1).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-16 (Bucks 
Mountain-Nevada City Apprentice Either-Sex Deer 
Hunt) shall be concurrent with the zone D-3 general 
season as defined in subsection 360(a)(4)(B).
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 75.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult chap-
eron 18 years of age or older while hunting.
DEER HUNTING
(40) J-17 (Blue Canyon Apprentice Either-Sex Deer 
Hunt).
(A) Area: Excluding Colusa County, in those portions of 
Nevada, Placer, Sacramento, Sutter, Yolo and Yuba 
Counties within the area described as zone D-4 (see 
subsection 360(a)(4)(A)2).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-17 (Blue 
Canyon Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall be 
concurrent with the zone D-4 general season as 
defined in subsection 360(a)(4)(B).
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 25.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult chap-
eron 18 years of age or older while hunting.
(41) J-18 (Pacific-Grizzly Flat Apprentice Either-Sex Deer 
Hunt).
(A) Area: Excluding Alpine, Amador, Calaveras and 
Tuolumne counties, in those portions of El Dorado, 
Placer, Sacramento, San Joaquin, and Stanislaus 
counties within the area described as zone D-5 (see 
subsection 360(a)(4)(A)3).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-18 (Pacific-
Grizzly Flat Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall 
be concurrent with the zone D-5 general season as 
defined in subsection 360(a)(4)(B).
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 75.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult chap-
eron 18 years of age or older while hunting.
(42) J-19 (Zone X-7a Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: In those portions of Lassen, Nevada, Plumas 
and Sierra Counties within the area described as 
zone X-7a (see subsection 360(b)(10)(A)).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-19 (Zone 
X-7a Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall be 
concurrent with the zone X-7a general season as 
defined in subsection 360(b)(10)(B).
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 25.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
=== page 59 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
59
DEER HUNTING
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult 
chaperon 18 years of age or older while hunting.
(43) J-20 (Zone X-7b Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: In those portions of Nevada, Placer and Sierra 
Counties within the area described as zone X-7b 
(see subsection 360(b)(11)(A)).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-20 (Zone 
X-7b Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall be 
concurrent with the zone X-7b general season as 
described in subsection 360(b)(11)(B).
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 20.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holders shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult 
chaperon 18 years of age or older while hunting.
(44) J-21 (East Tehama Apprentice Either-Sex Deer 
Hunt).
(A) Area: In that portion of Tehama County within the 
area described as zone C-4 (see subsection 360(a)
(3)(A)4.).
(B) Season: The season for additional hunt J-21 (East 
Tehama Apprentice Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall open 
on the third Saturday in September and extend for 
44 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 50.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. Only junior license holder shall apply (see subsection 
708.2).
2. Tagholders shall be accompanied by an adult 
chaperon 18 years of age or older while hunting.
(45) Conditions for Additional Hunts.
(A) When hunting on military reservations or private 
lands, hunters shall have in their possession a written 
permit signed by the landowner, which may specify 
where and when the permittee may hunt.
(B) When required, tagholders shall check in and check 
out of designated check stations.
(d) Fund-raising License Tags.
Fund-raising license tags (Golden Opportunity and 
REMINDER  - All successful hunters must retain the tag while in possession of 
game meat. FGC 3080(b)(1).
Open Zone) for the taking of buck deer (as defined in 
subsection 351(a)) shall be offered for sale to raise funds 
for the management of deer through the Big Game 
Management Account. The department may conduct 
a random drawing to distribute fund-raising tags. Any 
resident or nonresident is eligible to purchase a fund-
raising license tag. A fund-raising license tag distributed 
through a department random drawing does not include 
the fee for processing and issuing a hunting license. The 
sale price of a fund-raising license tag includes the fees 
for deer tag applications and for processing and issuing a 
hunting license. The purchasers shall be issued a hunting 
license and fund-raising license tags only after meeting 
the hunter education requirements for a hunting license.
(1) Golden Opportunity Tag.
(A) Area: Golden Opportunity tags shall be valid 
statewide.
(B) Season: Golden Opportunity tags shall be valid 
beginning on the second Saturday in July and extend 
through December 31.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 5.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. The holder of a Golden Opportunity tag may take 
deer using methods authorized in sections 353 and 
354.
2. Fund-raising license tagholders who receive a deer 
tag pursuant to Sections 708.1 through 708.3 shall be 
allowed to exchange that tag under the provisions 
of subsection 708.4. Tagholders shall not be entitled 
to obtain more than two (2) deer tags as described 
in subsection 708.1(a)(1).
1. Tagholders shall report to the Assistant Chief, 
Law Enforcement Division at the appropriate 
Department of Fish and Game Regional deer using 
methods authorized in sections 353 and 354.
2. Fund-raising license tagholders who receive a deer 
tag pursuant to Sections 708.1 through 708.3 shall be 
allowed to exchange that tag under the provisions 
of subsection 708.4. Tagholders shall not be entitled 
to obtain more than two (2) deer tags as described 
in subsection 708.1(a)(1).
1. Tagholders shall report to the Assistant Chief, 
Law Enforcement Division at the appropriate 
Department of Fish and Game Regional deer using 
methods authorized in sections 353 and 354.
2. Fund-raising license tagholders who receive a deer 
=== page 60 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
60
Education Instructor Incentive X-Zone general 
season tag shall be issued per X-Zone each season, 
and no X-Zone tag shall be allocated to the Hunter 
Education Program from an X-Zone where fewer 
than 100 tags are issued in that season.
(2) Open Zone Tag.
(A) Area: Open Zone tags shall be valid in the areas as 
described in sections 360 and 361.
(B) Season: Open Zone tags shall be valid during the 
authorized seasons described in sections 360 and 
361.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 5.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. The holder of an Open Zone tag shall meet any 
special conditions and take deer using the method 
of take described in sections 360 and 361.
2. Fund-raising license tagholders who receive a deer 
tag pursuant to Sections 708.1 through 708.3 shall be 
allowed to exchange that tag under the provisions 
of subsection 708.4. Tagholders shall not be entitled 
to obtain more than two (2) deer tags as described 
in subsection 708.1(a)(1).
3. Tagholders shall report to the Assistant Chief, 
Law Enforcement Division at the appropriate 
Department of Fish and Game Regional 
Headquarters prior to hunting as to the time and 
area they intend to hunt.
(e) Hunter Education Instructor Incentive Tags.
Hunter Education Instructor Incentive Tags shall be 
annually allocated to the Hunter Education Program for 
distribution among Certified Hunter Education Instructors 
pursuant to Section 709.
(1) X-Zone general season hunts
(A) Area: An X-Zone general season tag shall be valid 
in the area described in subsection 360(b) that 
corresponds to the X-Zone indicated on the tag.
(B) Season: An X-Zone tag is valid during the authorized 
season described in subsection 360(b) that 
corresponds to the X-Zone indicated on the tag.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 10
(E) Special Conditions: No more than one Hunter 
DEER HUNTING
tag pursuant to Sections 708.1 through 708.3 shall be 
allowed to exchange that tag under the provisions 
of subsection 708.4. Tagholders shall not be entitled 
to obtain more than two (2) deer tags as described 
in subsection 708.1(a)(1).
3. Tagholders shall report to the Assistant Chief, 
Law Enforcement Division at the appropriate 
Department of Fish and Game Regional 
Headquarters prior to hunting as to the time and 
area they intend to hunt.
John A.
Archery Deer Hunting
=== page 61 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
61
ARCHERY DEER HUNTING
Archery Deer Hunting (T14 CCR §361)
(a) Archery Hunting With General Deer Zone 
Tags. 
Deer may be taken during the archery season only with 
archery equipment specified in Section 354 as follows:
(1) Zone A.
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(a)(1)(A)1. through 2.
(B) Season: The archery deer season in Zone A-South 
Unit 110 and Zone A-North Unit 160 shall open on the 
second Saturday in July and extend for 23 consecu-
tive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(2) B Zones.
(A) Zones B-1 through B-3, B-5 and B-6.
1. Area: As described in subsection 360(a)(2)(A).
2. Season: The archery deer season in Zones B-1 through 
B-3, B-5 and B-6 shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
3. Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn (see 
subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(B) Zone B-4.
1. Area: As described in subsection 360(a)(2)(A)4.
2. Season: The archery deer season in Zone B-4 shall 
open on the fourth Saturday in July and extend for 
23 consecutive days.
(3) C Zones 
(Note: see subsection 361(b) below for area-specific ar -
chery hunt A-1 (C Zones Archery Only Hunt)).
(4) D Zones.
(A) Zones D-3 through D-5.
1. Area: As described in subsection 360(a)(4)(A)1. through 
3.
2. Season: The archery season in Zones D-3, D-4, and 
D-5 shall open on the third Saturday in August and 
extend for 23 days.
3. Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn (see 
subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
4. Special Conditions: Hunters that possess a Zone D-3-5 
tag may hunt in zones D-3, D-4, and D-5.
(B) Zones D-6 through D-10.
Note: In 2026-2027, D-7 is part of the CWD Management 
Zone and hunters shall submit a CWD sample to CDFW 
within 10 days of harvest. Hunters are also encouraged 
to leave brain, spinal column, and gut pile at the 
harvest site.
1. Area: As described in subsection 360(a)(5)(A) through 
(9)(A).
2. Season: The archery season in zones D-6 through D-10 
shall open on the third Saturday in August and ex-
tend for 23 days.
3. Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn (see 
subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(C) Zones D-11, D-13 and D-15.
1. Area: As described in subsection 360(a)(10)(A), (12)
(A) and (14)(A), respectively.
2. Season: The archery season in Zones D-11, D-13 and 
D-15 shall open on the first Saturday in September 
and extend for 23 days.
3. Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn (see 
subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
4. Special Conditions: Hunters that possess a D-11, D-13, 
or D-15 tag may hunt in any, or all three of those 
zones.
(D) Zone D-12.
1. Area: As described in subsection 360(a)(11)(A).
2. Season: The archery season in Zone D-12 shall open 
on the first Saturday in October and extend for 23 
consecutive days.
3. Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn (see 
subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(E) Zones D-14, D-16, D-17 and D-19.
1. Area: As described in subsection 360(a)(13)(A), (15)
(A), (16)(A) and (17)(A), respectively.
2. Season: The archery season in zones D-14, D-16, 
D-17 and D-19 shall open on the first Saturday in 
September and extend for 23 consecutive days.
3. Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn (see 
subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(b) Archery Hunting With Area-specific Archery 
Tags. 
Deer may be taken only with archery equipment specified 
in Section 354, only during the archery seasons as follows:
(1) A-1 (C Zones Archery Only Hunt).
(A) Area: Shall include all of Zones C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-4 
as described in subsections 360(a)(3)(A)1 through 4.
(B) Season:
1. Zone C-1. The archery season for Zone C-1 shall open 
on the third Saturday in August and extend for 16 
consecutive days.
2. Zone C-2. The archery season for Zone C-2 shall open 
on the third Saturday in August and extend for 23 
consecutive days.
3. Zone C-3. The archery season for Zone C-3 shall open 
on the third Saturday in August and extend for 23 
consecutive days.
4. Zone C-4. The archery season for Zone C-4 shall open 
on the third Saturday in August and extend for 16 
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 1,945 A-1 (C Zones Archery Only 
Hunt) tags are valid in Zones C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-4 
=== page 62 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
62
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(7)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-9 (Zone X-5b 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 5.
(9) A-11 (Zone X-6a Archery Hunt).
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(8)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-11 (Zone X-6a 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 50.
(10) A-12 (Zone X-6b Archery Hunt).
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(9)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-12 (Zone X-6b 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 90.
(11) A-13 (Zone X-7a Archery Hunt).
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(10)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-13 (Zone X-7a 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 45.
(12) A-14 (Zone X-7b Archery Hunt).
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(11)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-14 (Zone X-7b 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 25.
(13) A-15 (Zone X-8 Archery Hunt).
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(12)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-15 (Zone X-8 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 40.
(14) A-16 (Zone X-9a Archery Hunt).
Note: In 2026-2027, X-9a is part of the CWD 
Management Zone and hunters shall submit a CWD 
sample to CDFW within 10 days of harvest. Hunters are 
also encouraged to leave brain, spinal column, and gut 
ARCHERY DEER HUNTING
only during the archery season as specified above in 
subsections 361(b)(1)(B)1 through 4.
(2) A-3 (Zone X-1 Archery Hunt)
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(1)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-3 (Zone X-1 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn (see 
subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 100.
(3) A-4 (Zone X-2 Archery Hunt)
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(2)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-4 (Zone X-2 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn (see 
subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 10.
(4) A-5 (Zone X-3a Archery Hunt).
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(3)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-5 (Zone X-3a 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn (see 
subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 40.
(5) A-6 (Zone X-3b Archery Hunt).
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(4)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-6 (Zone X-3b 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn (see 
subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 70.
(6) A-7 (Zone X-4 Archery Hunt).
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(5)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-7 (Zone X-4 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn (see 
subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 120.
(7) A-8 (Zone X-5a Archery Hunt).
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(6)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-8 (Zone X-5a 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn (see 
subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 10.
(8) A-9 (Zone X-5b Archery Hunt).
=== page 63 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
63
ARCHERY DEER HUNTING
pile at the harvest site.
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(13)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-16 (Zone X-9a 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 30.
(15) A-17 (Zone X-9b Archery Hunt).
Note: In 2026-2027, X-9b is part of the CWD 
Management Zone and hunters shall submit a CWD 
sample to CDFW within 10 days of harvest. Hunters are 
also encouraged to leave brain, spinal column, and gut 
pile at the harvest site.
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(14)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-17 (Zone X-9b 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 210.
(16) A-18 (Zone X-9c Archery Hunt).
Note: In 2026-2027, X-9c is part of the CWD 
Management Zone and hunters shall submit a CWD 
sample to CDFW within 10 days of harvest. Hunters are 
also encouraged to leave brain, spinal column, and gut 
pile at the harvest site.
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(15)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-18 (Zone X-9c 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 350.
(17) A-19 (Zone X-10 Archery Hunt).
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(16)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-19 (Zone X-10 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 16 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 100.
(18) A-20 (Zone X-12 Archery Hunt).
(A) Area: As described in subsection 360(b)(17)(A).
(B) Season: The archery season for hunt A-20 (Zone X-12 
Archery Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
August and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 40.
(19) A-21 (Anderson Flat Archery Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: In that portion of hunt Zone D-6 in Mariposa and 
Tuolumne counties lying within a line beginning at the 
intersection of Highway 140 and Bull Creek Road at 
Briceburg; north on Bull Creek Road (U.S. Forest Service 
Road 2S05) to Greeley Hill Road; west on Greeley 
Hill Road to Smith Station Road (County Route J20); 
north on Smith Station Road to Highway 120 (near 
Burch Meadow); east on Highway 120 to the Yosemite 
National Park Boundary (near Big Oak-Flat Ranger 
Station); southeast along the Yosemite National Park 
Boundary to Highway 140; west on Highway 140 to the 
Yosemite National Park Boundary; northwest along the 
Yosemite National Park Boundary to Highway 140 (at 
Redbud Campground); west on Highway 140 to the 
point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season for hunt A-21 (Anderson Flat Archery 
Buck Hunt) shall open on the second Saturday in 
November and extend for 14 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 25.
(20) A-22 (San Diego Archery Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of San Diego County within Zone 
D-16 (see subsection 360(a)(15)(A)).
(B) Season: The season for hunt A-22 (San Diego Archery 
Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall open on the first Saturday 
in September and extend for 44 consecutive days, 
and reopen on the third Saturday in November and 
extend through December 31.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 1,000.
(21) A-24 (Monterey Archery Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: All of Monterey County, except Fort Ord 
Military Reservation.
(B) Season: The season for hunt A-24 (Monterey Archery 
Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall open on the second 
Saturday in October and extend for 30 consecutive 
days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 100.
(22) A-25 (Lake Sonoma Archery Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Sonoma County within the 
boundaries of the Lake Sonoma Area, U.S. Army Corps 
of Engineers (COE) property described as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of Hot Springs Road and 
the COE boundary; east and south along the bound-
ary line to the intersection with Brush Creek; west along 
the north bank of Brush Creek (shoreline) to the Dry 
Creek arm of Lake Sonoma; south along the shoreline 
of the Dry Creek arm to Smittle Creek; north along the 
COE property line to Dry Creek; east along the COE 
boundary across Cherry Creek, Skunk Creek, and Yorty 
Creek to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season for hunt A-25 (Lake Sonoma 
Archery Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall be open on 
=== page 64 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
64
ARCHERY DEER HUNTING
Saturdays, Sundays and Mondays only, beginning 
on the first Saturday in October and extending for 24 
consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 35.
(E) Special Conditions:
1. The use of dogs is prohibited.
2. Boats are required for all areas west of Cherry Creek 
(some 2/3 0f the hunt area). Only cartop boats are 
allowed to launch from the Yorty Creek access.
(23) A-26 (Bass Hill Archery Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Lassen County within the area 
described as Zone X-6a (see subsection 360(b)(8)(A)).
(B) Season: The season for hunt A-26 (Bass Hill Archery 
Buck Hunt) shall open on the third Saturday in 
November and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 30.
(24) A-27 (Devil’s Garden Archery Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Modoc County within a line 
beginning at the intersection of Malin Road (Modoc 
County 114) and the California-Oregon state line; east 
along the state line to Crowder Flat Road; south along 
Crowder Flat Road to Blue Mountain Road (Modoc 
County 136); west on Blue Mountain Road to Blue 
Mountain-Mowitz Butte-Ambrose Road; south on Blue 
Mountain-Mowitz Butte-Ambrose Road to Highway 
139; north on Highway 139 to Malin Road; north on 
Malin Road to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season for hunt A-27 (Devil’s Garden 
Archery Buck Hunt) shall open on the fourth Saturday 
in October and extend for 16 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 10.
(25) A-30 (Covelo Archery Buck Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Mendocino County within a line 
beginning at the intersection of Highway 101 and 
the Humboldt-Mendocino county line; east along 
the Humboldt-Mendocino county line to the Trinity-
Mendocino county line; east along Trinity-Mendocino 
county line to the Mendocino-Tehama county line; 
south on the Mendocino-Tehama county line to 
the Mendocino-Glenn county line; south on the 
Mendocino-Glenn county line to the Mendocino-Lake 
county line; west and south on the Mendocino-Lake 
county line to the Main Eel River; west and north on 
the Main Eel River to Hearst-Willits Road; southwest 
on Hearst-Willits Road to Commercial Avenue; west 
on Commercial Avenue to Highway 101; north on 
Highway 101 to the point of beginning.
(B) Season: The season for hunt A-30 (Covelo Archery 
Buck Hunt) shall open on the second Saturday in 
November and extend for sixteen consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One buck, forked horn 
(see subsection 351(a)) or better, per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 40.
(26) A-31 (Los Angeles Archery Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Los Angeles County within Zone 
D-11 (see subsection 360(a)(10)(A)).
(B) Season: The season for hunt A-31 (Los Angeles Archery 
Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall open on the fourth Saturday 
in September and extend through December 31.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 1,000.
(27) A-32 (Ventura/Los Angeles Late Season Archery 
Either-Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: In those portions of Los Angeles and Ventura 
counties within the area described as the A Zone 
(see subsection 360(a)(1)(A)).
(B) Season: The season for hunt A-32 (Ventura/Los 
Angeles Late Season Archery Either-Sex Deer Hunt) 
shall open on the second Saturday in November 
and extend for 23 consecutive days.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 250.
(28) A-33 (Fort Hunter Liggett Late Season Archery Either-
Sex Deer Hunt).
(A) Area: That portion of Monterey County lying within 
the exterior boundaries of the Hunter Liggett Military 
Reservation, except as restricted by the Commanding 
Officer.
(B) Season: The season for hunt A-33 (Fort Hunter Liggett 
Late Season Archery Either-Sex Deer Hunt) shall be 
open beginning the first Saturday in October and con-
tinuing through November 11, except if rescheduled 
by the Commanding Officer with Department concur-
rence between the season opener and December 31.
(C) Bag and Possession Limit: One either-sex deer (see 
subsection 351(c)) per tag.
(D) Number of Tags: 50.
(E) Special Conditions: In the event the Commanding 
Officer cancels the hunt, A-33 tagholders may ex-
change the unused tag for any remaining deer tag 
and have accumulated and earned preference 
points restored pursuant to Section 708.14 for tags is-
sued through the Big Game Drawing.
(c) Archery Hunting with Archery Only Tags. 
Deer may be taken only with archery equipment speci -
fied in Section 354, during the archery seasons and gen -
eral seasons as follows:
(1) Number of Archery Only Tags Permitted. A person 
may obtain an archery only tag using a one-deer 
tag application and a second archery only tag us-
ing a second deer tag application.
(2) Zones in Which Archery Only Tags are Valid. An 
ARCHERY DEER HUNTING
=== page 65 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
65
ARCHERY DEER HUNTING
archery only tag is valid for hunt G-10, and during 
the archery season and general season in all zones 
except C-1 through C-4 and X-1 through X-12.
(3) Areas: As described in subsections 360(a) and (c).
(4) Seasons: The archery season and general seasons 
are provided in subsection 361(a) above and in sub-
sections 360(a) and (c).
(5) Bag and Possession Limit: All bag and possession limits 
per zone are the same as those described in subsections 
360(a) and (c).
(d) Hunting Area Limitations. 
Archers not in possession of an archery only tag may hunt 
only in the zone, zones, or areas for which they have a gen-
eral tag or an area-specific archery tag. (Refer to subsection 
361(c)(2) for zones in which archery only tags are valid).
(e) Crossbow Prohibition. 
Except as provided in subsection 354(j), crossbows may 
not be used during any archery season or during the 
general season when using an archery only tag.
Barbara M.
Californians turn in poachers  
& polluters
Call: 1 (888) 334-CAL TIP  
Text: 847411 
Download: Free App 
=== page 66 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
66
2026 DEER HUNTS
GENERAL ZONES
Hunt 
Code Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 
2026 Archery  
Season Dates
2026 General  
Season Dates
A A Zone - Archery and General - Buck 65,000 Jul 11 - Aug 2 Aug 8 - Sep 20
B
B1 Zone - Archery and General - Buck
35,000
Aug 15 - Sep 6 Sep 19 - Oct 25
B2 Zone - Archery and General - Buck Aug 15 - Sep 6 Sep 19 - Oct 25
B3 Zone - Archery and General - Buck Aug 15 - Sep 6 Sep 19 - Oct 25
B4 Zone - Archery and General - Buck Jul 25 - Aug 16 Aug 22- Sep 27
B5 Zone - Archery and General - Buck Aug 15 - Sep 6 Sep 19 - Oct 25
B6 Zone - Archery and General - Buck Aug 15 - Sep 6 Sep 19 - Oct 18
C
C1 Zone General Seasons - Buck
8,150
For Archery Deer 
Seasons in the C 
Zones See Hunt A1
Sep 19 - Oct 18
C2 Zone General Seasons - Buck Sep 19- Oct 25
C3 Zone General Seasons - Buck Sep 19 - Oct 25
C4 Zone General Seasons - Buck Sep 19 - Oct 4
D3-5 D3-5 Zone - Archery and General - Buck 33,000 Aug 15 - Sep 6 Sep 26 - Nov 1
D6 Zone D6 Archery and General Seasons - Buck 10,000 Aug 15 - Sep 6 Sep 19 - Nov 1
D7* D7 Zone - Archery and General - Buck 9,000 Aug 15 - Sep 6 Sep 19 - Nov 1
D8 D8 Zone - Archery and General - Buck 8,000 Aug 15 - Sep 6 Sep 26 - Oct 25
D9 Zone D9 Archery and General Seasons - Buck 2,000 Aug 15 - Sep 6 Sep 26 - Oct 25
D10 D10 Zone - Archery and General - Buck 700 Aug 15 - Sep 6 Sep 26 - Oct 25
D11 D11 Zone - Archery and General - Buck 5,500 Sep 5 - Sep 27 Oct 10 - Nov 8
D12 Zone D12 Archery and General Seasons - Buck 950 Oct 3 - Oct 25 Nov 7 - Nov 29
D13 D13 Zone - Archery and General - Buck 4,000 Sep 5 - Sep 27 Oct 10 - Nov 8
D14 Zone D14 Archery and General Seasons - Buck 3,000 Sep 5 - Sep 27 Oct 10 - Nov 8
D15 D15 Zone - Archery and General Seasons - Buck 1,500 Sep 5- Sep 27 Oct 10 - Nov 8
D16 D16 Zone - Archery and General Seasons - Buck 3,000 Sep 5 - Sep 27 Oct 24 - Nov 22
D17 Zone D17 Archery and General Seasons - Buck 500 Sep 5 - Sep 27 Oct 10 - Nov 1
D19 D19 Zone - Archery and General Seasons - Buck 1,500 Sep 5 - Sep 27 Oct 3 - Nov 1
2026 Deer Hunts
=== page 67 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
67
2026 DEER HUNTS
X ZONES
Hunt  
Code Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 
2026 Archery  
Season Dates
2026 General  
Season Dates
X1 Zone X1 General Season - Buck 760 For Archery in Zone X-1 See 
Hunt A-3 Oct 3 - Oct 18
X2 Zone X2 General Season - Buck 190 For Archery in Zone X-2 See 
Hunt A-4 Oct 3 - Oct 18
X3A Zone X3a General Season - Buck 355 For Archery in Zone X-3a See 
Hunt A-5 Oct 3 - Oct 18
X3B Zone X3b General Season - Buck 500 For Archery in Zone X-3b See 
Hunt A-6 Oct 3 - Oct 18
X4 Zone X4 General Season - Buck 480 For Archery in Zone X-4 See 
Hunt A-7 Oct 3 - Oct 18
X5A Zone X5a General Season - Buck 75 For Archery in Zone X-5a See 
Hunt A-8 Oct 3 - Oct 18
X5B Zone X5b General Season - Buck 50 For Archery in Zone X-5b See 
Hunt A-9 Oct 3 - Oct 18
X6A Zone X6a General Season - Buck 330 For Archery in Zone X-6a See 
Hunt A-11 Oct 3 - Oct 18
X6B Zone X6b General Season - Buck 310 For Archery in Zone X-6b See 
Hunt A-12 Oct 3 - Oct 18
X7A Zone X7a General Season - Buck 230 For Archery in Zone X-7a See 
Hunt A-13 Oct 3 - Oct 18
X7B Zone X7b General Season - Buck 135 For Archery in Zone X-7b See 
Hunt A-14 Oct 3 - Oct 18
X8 Zone X8 General Season - Buck 210 For Archery in Zone X-8 See 
Hunt A-15 Sep 26 - Oct 11
X9A* Zone X9a General Season - Buck 270 For Archery in Zone X-9a See 
Hunt A-16 Sep 19 - Oct 12
X9B* Zone X9b General Season - Buck 230 For Archery in Zone X-9b See 
Hunt A-17 Sep 19 - Oct 12
X9C* Zone X9c General Season - Buck 325 For Archery in Zone X-9c See 
Hunt A-18 Oct 17 - Nov 8
X10 Zone X10 General Season - Buck 400 For Archery in Zone X-10 See  
Hunt A-19 Sep 26 - Oct 11
X12 Zone X12 General Season - Buck 350 For Archery in Zone X-12 See  
Hunt A-20 Sep 19 - Oct 12
=== page 68 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
68
2026 DEER HUNTS
GENERAL METHODS
Hunt 
Code Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 
2026 General  
Season Dates
G1 Late Season Buck Hunt In Zone C4 - General Methods 2,710 Oct 24 - Nov 1
G3* Goodale Buck - General Methods 25 Dec 5 - Dec 20
G6 Kern River Deer Herd Buck - General Methods 50 Dec 5 - Dec 13
G12 Gray Lodge Shotgun Either-sex 30 Sep 19 - Sep 27
G13 San Diego antlerless - General Methods 300 Oct 24 - Nov 15
G19 Sutter-Yuba Wildlife Areas Either-sex - Shotgun/Archery/Crossbow 25 Sep 26 - Dec 31
G21 Ventana Wilderness Buck - General Methods 25 Nov 14 - Dec 6
G37 Anderson Flat Buck - General Methods 25 Nov 28 - Dec 6
G38 X-10 Late Season Buck - General Methods 300 Oct 17 - Nov 1
G39 Round Valley Late Season Buck - General Methods 2 Oct 24 - Nov 8
G40* Late Season D7 Buck Hunt 25 Nov 28 - Dec 6
MUZZLELOADING HUNTS
Hunt 
Code Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 
2026 General  
Season Dates
M3 Doyle Muzzleloading Rifle Buck 20 Nov 21 - Nov 29
M4 Horse Lake Muzzleloading Rifle Buck 10 Oct 24 - Nov 1
M5 East Lassen Muzzleloading Rifle Buck 5 Oct 24 - Nov 1
M6 San Diego Muzzleloading Rifle Either-sex 80 Dec 19 - Dec 31
M7 Ventura Muzzleloading Rifle Either-sex 150 Nov 28 - Dec 13
M8 Bass Hill Muzzleloading Rifle Buck 20 Oct 24 - Nov 1
M9 Devil’s Garden Muzzleloading Rifle Buck 15 Oct 24 - Nov 8
M11 Northwestern Muzzleloading Rifle Buck 20 Nov 14 - Nov 29
MA1 San Luis Obispo Muzzleloading Rifle/ Archery Either-sex 150 Nov 28 - Dec 13
MA3 Santa Barbara Muzzleloading Rifle/ Archery Buck 150 Nov 28 - Dec 13
 *In 2026-2027, starred hunts are part of the CWD Management Zone and hunters shall submit a CWD sample 
to CDFW within 10 days of harvest. Hunters are also encouraged to leave brain, spinal column, and gut pile at 
the harvest site.
=== page 69 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
69
2026 DEER HUNTS
APPRENTICE HUNTS
Hunt 
Code Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 
2026 General  
Season Dates
J1 Lake Sonoma Apprentice Either-sex - General Methods 25 Nov 7 - Nov 8
J3 Tehama Wildlife Area Apprentice Buck - General Methods 15 Nov 28 - Nov 29
J4 Shasta-Trinity Apprentice Buck - General Methods 15 Nov 28 - Dec 6
J8 Daugherty Hill Wildlife Area Apprentice Either-sex - General Methods 15 Dec 5 - Dec 31
J9 Little Dry Creek Apprentice Shotgun Either-sex 5 Sep 19 - Sep 27
J10 Fort Hunter Liggett Apprentice EitherSex - General Methods 30 Oct 3-4 & Oct 10-12
J11 San Bernardino Apprentice Either-sex - General Methods 40 Nov 21 - Nov 29
J12 Round Valley Apprentice Buck - General Methods 10 Dec 5 - Dec 20
J13 Los Angeles Apprentice Either-sex - General Methods 40 Nov 21 - Nov 29
J14 Riverside Apprentice Either-sex - General Methods 30 Nov 21 - Nov 29
J15 Anderson Flat Apprentice Buck - General Methods 10 Nov 28 - Dec 6
J16 Bucks Mountain-Nevada City Apprentice Either-sex - General Methods 75 Sep 26 - Nov 1
J17 Blue Canyon Apprentice Either-sex - General Methods 25 Sep 26 - Nov 1
J18 Pacific - Grizzly Flat Apprentice Either-sex - General Methods 75 Sep 26 - Nov 1
J19 Zone X7a Apprentice Either-sex - General Methods 25 Oct 3 - Oct 18
J20 Zone X7b Apprentice Either-sex - General Methods 20 Oct 3 - Oct 18
J21 East Tehama Apprentice Either-sex - General Methods 50 Sep 19 - Nov 1
NON-REPORTING OF 2026 DEER TAGS WILL BE ASSESSED A PENAL TY 
Deer tag holders who fail to submit a harvest report for any 2026 deer tag by January 31, 2027, will be assessed 
a non-reporting fee when purchasing a deer tag drawing application or deer tag in the 2027 license year.
=== page 70 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
70
2026 DEER HUNTS
AREA-SPECIFIC ARCHERY HUNTS
Hunt 
Code Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 
2026 Archery  
Season Dates
AO Archery-Only 100,000
Valid during the archery 
and general seasons in the 
A, B, and D Zones and Hunt 
G-10 (Archery Methods 
Only); NOT valid during any 
C or X Zone season or hunt.
A1
C Zones Archery Only Hunt (Zone C-1 Season)
1,945
Aug 15 - Aug 30
C Zones Archery Only Hunt (Zone C-2 Season) Aug 15 - Sep 6
C Zones Archery Only Hunt (Zone C-3 Season) Aug 15 - Sep 6
C Zones Archery Only Hunt (Zone C-4 Season) Aug 15 - Aug 30
A3 Archery Hunt In Zone X1 - Buck 100 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A4 Archery Hunt In Zone X2 - Buck 10 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A5 Archery Hunt In Zone X3a - Buck 40 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A6 Archery Hunt In Zone X3b - Buck 70 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A7 Archery Hunt In Zone X4 - Buck 120 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A8 Archery Hunt In Zone X5a - Buck 10 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A9 Archery Hunt In Zone X5b - Buck 5 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A11 Archery Hunt In Zone X6a - Buck 50 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A12 Archery Hunt In Zone X6b - Buck 90 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A13 Archery Hunt In Zone X7a - Buck 45 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A14 Archery Hunt In Zone X7b - Buck 25 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A15 Archery Hunt In Zone X8 - Buck 40 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A16* Archery Hunt In Zone X9a - Buck 30 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A17* Archery Hunt In Zone X9b - Buck 210 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A18* Archery Hunt in Zone X9c - Buck 350 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A19 Archery Hunt in X10 - Buck 100 Aug 15 - Aug 30
A20 Archery Hunt In Zone X12 - Buck 40 Aug 15 - Sep 6
A21 Anderson Flat Archery Buck 25 Nov 14 - Nov 27
A22 San Diego Archery Either-sex Deer - Split Season Hunt 1,000
Sep 5 - Oct 18
Nov 21 - Dec 31
A24 Monterey Archery Either-sex 100 Oct 10-Nov 08
A25 Lake Sonoma Archery Either-sex 35 Oct 03-Oct 26
A26 Bass Hill Archery Buck 30 Nov 21-Dec 13
A27 Devil’s Garden Archery Buck 10 Oct 24-Nov 08
A30 Covelo Archery Buck 40 Nov 14-Nov 29
A31 Los Angeles Archery Either-sex 1,000 Sep 26 - Dec 31
A32 Ventura/Los Angeles Late Season Archery Either-sex 250 Nov 14 - Dec 06
=== page 71 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
71
2026 DEER HUNTS
AREA-SPECIFIC ARCHERY HUNTS
Hunt 
Code Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 
2026 Archery  
Season Dates
A33 Fort Hunter Liggett Late Season Archery Either-sex 50 Oct 3-Nov 11
 *In 2026-2027, starred hunts are part of the CWD Management Zone and hunters shall submit a CWD sample 
to CDFW within 10 days of harvest. Hunters are also encouraged to leave brain, spinal column, and gut pile at 
the harvest site.
Austin A.
=== page 72 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
72
Deer Tagging and Reporting 
Requirements (FGC §4336)
(a) The person to whom a deer tag has been issued shall 
carry the tag while hunting deer. Upon the killing of 
any deer, that person shall immediately fill out the tag 
completely, legibly, and permanently, and cut out or 
punch out and completely remove notches or punch 
holes for the month and date of the kill. The deer tag 
shall be immediately attached to the antlers of ant-
lered deer or to the ear of any other deer and kept 
attached during the open season and for 15 days 
thereafter. The holder of the deer tag shall immediate-
ly, upon harvesting a deer, notify the department in a 
manner specified by the commission.
(b) Except as otherwise provided by this code or regula-
tion adopted pursuant to this code, it is unlawful to 
possess any untagged deer.
Deer Tagging and Reporting 
Requirements (T14 CCR §708.5)
(a) Upon the killing of any deer the tag holder shall imme-
diately fill out all portions of the tag including the report 
card completely, legibly, and permanently, and cut out 
or punch out and completely remove notches or punch 
holes for the month and date of the kill. The deer license 
tag shall be attached to the antlers of an antlered deer 
or to the ear of any other deer and kept attached dur -
ing the open season and for 15 days thereafter. Except 
as otherwise provided, possession of any untagged deer 
shall be a violation. (Refer to Fish and Game Code, 
Section 4336).
(b) Every person to whom a deer license tag is 
issued shall report to the Department their deer 
harvest.
(1) Successful deer tag holders are required to report 
deer harvested within 30 days of the date of harvest 
or by January 31, whichever date is first.
(2) Unsuccessful deer tag holders, whether they hunted 
or not, are required to report no harvest by January 
31 annually.
(c) Harvest Report Card Return and Reporting 
Mechanisms.
(1) By mail at the address specified on the harvest report 
card. A harvest report card returned by mail shall be 
postmarked by the date applicable to that card as 
specified in this section. If a report card is submitted 
by mail and not received by the department, it is 
considered not reported.
(2) Online through the department’s internet license sales 
service website by the date specified in the sec-
tion. Tag holders reporting online will be provided a 
confirmation number upon successful submission. The 
tag holder must record the provided confirmation 
number in the space provided on the harvest report 
card and retain the harvest report card until March 1 
annually. Tags reported online must be surrendered 
to the department upon demand.
(3) (d) Beginning July 1, 2016, deer tag holders, whether 
successful or unsuccessful, who fail to report by the 
date specified in this section shall be subject to a 
Deer Harvest Non-reporting Fee. The fee specified 
in Section 702 shall be charged prior to the issuance 
of a deer tag or deer tag drawing application in the 
following year.
(e) Chronic wasting disease (CWD) Management 
Zones (CMZ) are defined as:
(1) Any deer hunt zone in which a CWD-positive 
animal has been detected, excluding Zone A, using 
sampling and testing methods based on credible 
science as defined in Fish and Game Code Section 
33.
(2) Any deer hunt zone, excluding Zone A, within 5 
miles of the location where a CWD-positive animal 
has been detected, using sampling and testing 
methods based on credible science as defined in 
Fish and Game Code Section 33.
(3) Any county within Zone A where a CWD-positive 
animal has been detected or is within 5 miles of 
where a CWD-positive animal has been detected, 
using sampling and testing methods based on cred-
ible science as defined in Fish and Game Code 
Section 33.
(f) Annually, and prior to July 1, the director of the 
department shall designate any CMZ that will be a 
“testing CMZ” or a “testing and handling CMZ.”
(1) Testing CMZs shall be designated based on 
the need to better define new or ongoing CWD 
outbreak(s), the department’s capacity to collect 
and test samples, and to support management ac-
tions for the protection of natural resources.
(A) All hunters who harvest and possess a deer from 
a testing CMZ shall provide the department a sam-
ple, using only permissible sampling methods, for the 
purpose of CWD testing within 10 days of harvest. 
The following are the permissible sampling methods:
1. Bring the deer head (must include the retropha-
ryngeal lymph nodes) to a California CWD sam-
pling station or a participating meat processor or 
taxidermist. The department will maintain a list of 
sampling stations on its website (wildlife.ca.gov/
CWD/Sampling-Station) and will maintain a list of 
participating meat processors and taxidermists on 
its website (wildlife.ca.gov/CWD/Meat-Processors-
Taxidermists); or
2. Self-sample the deer and bring the retropha-
ryngeal lymph nodes directly to a California CWD 
sampling station. The department will maintain an 
DEER REPORTING
Deer Reporting
=== page 73 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
73
testing shall be relinquished to the department.
2. Heart, liver, and kidneys if possessed for human 
consumption.
(g) The department shall maintain and update a web-
site detailing current CMZs as defined in subsection (e), 
CMZ designations pursuant to subsection (f), and cur-
rent CWD surveillance information, including general 
locations and deer hunt zones where CWD-positive 
animals have been detected (wildlife.ca.gov/CWD).
Deer and Elk Tag Countersigning and 
Transporting Requirements (T14 CCR 
§708.6)
(a) Any person legally killing a deer in this state shall 
have the deer license tag countersigned by a per-
son authorized by the commission as described in 
subsection (c) before transporting such deer, except 
for the purpose of taking the deer to the nearest 
person authorized to countersign the license tag, 
on the route being followed from the point where 
the deer was taken (refer to Fish and Game Code, 
Section 4341).
(b) Any person legally killing an elk in this state shall 
have the elk license tag countersigned by a person 
authorized by the commission as described in sub-
section (c) before transporting such elk, except for 
the purpose of taking the elk to the nearest person 
authorized to countersign the license tag, on the 
route being followed from the point where the elk 
was taken.
(c) The following persons are authorized to countersign 
deer and elk tags:
(1) State:
(A) Fish and Game Commissioners
(B) Employees of the Department of Fish and Wildlife, 
including Certified Hunter Education Instructors
(C) Employees of the California Department of Forestry 
and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE)
(D) Plant Quarantine Inspector, Supervisor I, and Supervisor 
II
(2) Federal:
(A) Employees of the Bureau of Land Management
(B) Employees of the United States Forest Service
(C) Employees of the United States Fish & Wildlife Service
(D) All Uniformed Personnel of the National Park Service
(E) Commanding Officers of any United States military 
installation or their designated personnel for deer or 
elk taken on their reservation.
(F) Postmasters & Post Office Station or Branch Manager 
for deer or elk brought to their post office.
(3) Miscellaneous:
DEER REPORTING
optional how-to-guide and data card for CWD sam-
pling, data collection, and self-sample submissions 
on its website (wildlife.ca.gov/CWD/Collect-Submit-
Samples); or
3. Bring the deer (must include the retropharyngeal 
lymph nodes to a California CWD sampling station or a 
participating meat processor or taxidermist. The de-
partment will maintain a list of sampling stations on its 
website (wildlife.ca.gov/CWD/Sampling-Station) and 
will maintain a list of participating meat processors 
and taxidermists on its website (wildlife.ca.gov/CWD/
Meat-Processors-Taxidermists).
(B) When submitting a sample, the following information 
shall be provided: the hunter’s name, GO ID number, 
deer tag or document number, and harvest location 
(GPS coordinates preferred).
(2) Testing and handling CMZs shall be designated 
based on the criteria of (f)(1) in addition to the risk of 
spreading CWD through the movement of hunter-har-
vested carcasses or their parts, and the department’s 
capacity to facilitate both CWD sampling and disposal 
of high-risk materials.
(A) All hunters who harvest and possess a deer from a 
testing and handling CMZ shall provide the department 
with a sample, using only permissible sampling methods, 
for the purpose of CWD testing within 10 days of harvest. 
The following are the permissible sampling methods:
1. Bring the deer head (must include the retropharyn-
geal lymph nodes) to a California CWD sampling sta-
tion. The department will maintain a list of sampling 
stations on its website (wildlife.ca.gov/CWD/Sampling-
Station for locations); or
2. Self-sample the deer and bring the retropharyngeal 
lymph nodes directly to a California CWD sampling 
station. The department will maintain an optional how-
to-guide and data card for CWD sampling, data collec-
tion, and self-sample submissions on its website (wildlife.
ca.gov/CWD/Collect-Submit-Samples).
(B) When submitting a sample, the following information 
shall be provided: the hunter’s name, GO ID number, 
deer tag or document number, and harvest location 
(GPS coordinates preferred).
(C) All hunters who harvest a deer within a testing 
and handling CMZ shall leave all portions of the brain, 
spinal column, and entrails (gut pile) at the harvest site. 
Exceptions are:
1. Any portion of the brain and spinal column possessed 
for the purpose of providing a sample for CWD testing in 
accordance with permissible sampling methods out-
lined in subsection (f)(2)(A)1 or 2, and brought directly 
to a department office, or California CWD sampling 
station within the same or an adjacent CMZ. Heads 
(except that portion required to comply with subsec-
tion (a)), and any portion of the brain or spinal column 
removed from the harvest site for the purpose of CWD 
=== page 74 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
74
DEER REPORTING
NON-REPORTING DEER TAG PENALTY
Deer tag holders, whether successful, 
unsuccessful, or did not hunt, who fail 
to report by the January 31 deadline 
are subject to the non-reporting 
fee of $21.60 prior to the issuance 
of a deer tag or deer tag drawing 
application in the following year.
• Online harvest reporting closes at 
midnight on January 31.
• The harvest report card returned 
by mail must be postmarked by 
the January 31 deadline.
• If the harvest report card is 
submitted by mail and not 
received by the CDFW, it is 
considered not reported and 
charged the non-reporting fee.
• If the harvest report card is 
received late (failed to report by 
the January 31 deadline), the non-
reporting fee will be charged.
SHARE  
(SHARED HABITAT ALLIANCE FOR RECREATIONAL ENHANCEMENT)
The California Department of Fish and Wildlife’s SHARE program provides public access for hunting, fishing, 
and other recreational activities on private land. 
For property and hunt information please visit the SHARE webpage at: wildlife.ca.gov/Hunting/SHARE
SHARE
Shared Habitat Alliance for Recreational Enhancement
California Department of Fish and Wildlife
(A) Firefighters employed on a full-time basis, only when 
the deer or elk carcass is brought to their fire station.
(B) Judges or Justices of all state and United States 
courts.
(C) Notaries Public
(D) Peace Officers (salaried & non-salaried)
(E) Officers authorized to administer oaths
(F) Owners, corporate officers, managers or operators of 
lockers or cold storage plants for deer or elk brought 
to their place of business.
(d) No person may countersign his/her own deer tag or 
elk tag.on their reservation.
Deer Head Retention Requirements and 
Production Upon Demand (T14 CCR 
§708.7)
Any person taking any deer in this state shall retain in their 
possession during the open season thereon and for 15 
days thereafter, that portion of the head which in adult 
males normally bears the antlers, and shall produce the 
designated portion of the head upon the demand of 
any officer authorized to enforce the provisions of this 
regulation (refer to Fish and Game Code, Section 4302).
Deer Violations, Tag Forfeiture (T14 CCR 
§708.8)
Any person who is convicted of a violation involving deer 
shall forfeit their current year deer license tags and no 
new deer license tags may be issued to that person dur -
ing the then current hunting license year, and that per -
son may not apply for a deer license tag or deer prefer -
ence points for the following license year (refer to Fish 
and Game Code, Section 4340).
=== page 75 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
75
DEER REPORTING
Prohibition Against Possession of Cervid 
Biofluids (T14 CCR §714)
(a) For the purposes of this section, chronic wasting 
disease sensitive cervid biofluid refers to, but is not limited 
to, urine, feces, saliva, and scent gland secretions derived 
from a cervid.
(b) It is unlawful to import, use, or possess any product 
that is derived from, contains, or is labeled or advertised 
as containing any chronic wasting disease sensitive 
cervid biofluid.
(c) The prohibitions set forth in subsection (b) do not 
apply to parts retained on a field-dressed cervid legally 
harvested in California.
Prohibition Against Taking Resident 
Game Birds, Game Mammals, and 
Exotic Game Mammals by the Aid of 
Bait. (T14 CCR § 257.5)
(a) Bait. As used in this section, “bait” shall mean any 
shelled, shucked or unshucked corn, wheat or other 
grains, salt or any other feed, or cervid-derived biofluid, 
capable of luiring attracting, or enticing resident game 
birds or mammals.
(b) Baited Area. As used in this section, “baited area” 
shall mean any area where bait is directly or indirectly 
placed, exposed, deposited, distributed, or scattered, 
and such area shall remain a baited area for ten days 
following complete removal of all bait.
(c) It shall be unlawful to use lures or similar materials 
that contain or are labeled or advertised as containing 
any chronic wasting disease sensitive cervid biofluid as 
defined in Section 714, including but not limited to urine, 
feces, saliva, and scent gland secretions, to take any 
game bird or game mammal.
Restriction of Importation of Hunter-
Harvested Deer and Elk Carcasses. (T14 
CCR § 712)
It is unlawful to import, or possess any hunter harvested 
cervid carcass or parts of any cervid carcass imported 
into the State, such as deer, elk, moose, caribou, reindeer, 
and other species of the Family Cervidae, except for the 
following:
(a) portions of meat with no part of the spinal column, 
brain or head attached (other bones, such as legs and 
shoulders, may be attached).
(b) hides and capes (no spinal column, brain tissue or 
head may be attached).
(c) clean skull plates (no brain tissue may be present, 
pursuant to Section 714 of these regulations) with antlers 
attached, if present. For the purpose of this section, the 
skull plate is defined as the paired bones (frontal, parietal, 
and temporal bones) that make up the top portion of 
the skull surrounding the brain and, in antlered animals, 
from which the paired antlers extend.
(d) antlers with no meat or tissue attached, except legally 
harvested and possessed antlers in the velvet stage are 
allowed, if no meat, brain or other tissue is attached.
(e) finished taxidermy mounts with no meat or tissue 
attached (antlers in the velvet stage are allowed if no 
meat, brain or other tissue is attached).
(f) upper canine teeth (buglers, whistlers, ivories).
Gary K.
=== page 76 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
76
wildlife.ca.gov/Warden-Stamp
2026 WARDEN STAMP
for only $5!
2026
Get your 
=== page 77 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
77
ELK
Information on these elk hunts can be found at wildlife.ca.gov/hunting/elk
Effective July 1, 2019, it shall be unlawful to 
use, or possess with any firearm capable of firing, 
any projectile(s) not certified as nonlead when taking any 
wildlife for any purpose in this state. For more information 
please refer to the California Code of Regulations Title 14 
Section 250.1 and Fish and Game Code Section 3004.5.
ELK HUNT ZONE MAP
=== page 78 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
78
ELK HUNTING
Elk tags; fee (FGC §332)
(a) The commission may determine and fix the area or 
areas, the seasons and hours, the bag and pos-
session limit, and the number of elk that may be 
taken under rules and regulations that the commis-
sion may adopt from time to time. The commission 
may authorize the taking of tule elk if the average 
of the department’s statewide tule elk population 
estimates exceeds 2,000 animals, or the Legislature 
determines, pursuant to the reports required by 
Section 3951, that suitable areas cannot be found 
in the state to accommodate that population in a 
healthy condition.
(b) Only a person possessing a valid hunting license may 
obtain a tag for the taking of elk.
(c) The department may issue an elk tag upon pay-
ment of a fee. The fee for an elk tag shall be one 
hundred sixty-five dollars ($165) for a resident of the 
state, as adjusted under Section 713. On or before 
July 1, 2007, the commission shall, by regulation, fix 
the fee for a nonresident of the state at not less than 
one thousand fifty dollars ($1,050), as adjusted under 
Section 713. The fees shall be deposited in the Big 
Game Management Account established in Section 
3953 and, upon appropriation by the Legislature, 
shall be expended, in addition to moneys budgeted 
for salaries of the department as set forth in Section 
3953.
(d) The commission shall annually direct the department 
to authorize not more than three elk tags for the 
purpose of raising funds for programs and projects 
to benefit elk. These tags may be sold at auction to 
residents or nonresidents of the state or by another 
method and are not subject to the fee limitation 
prescribed in subdivision (c). All revenues from sales 
pursuant to this subdivision shall be deposited in 
the Big Game Management Account established 
in Section 3953 and, upon appropriation by the 
Legislature, shall be expended as set forth in that 
section.
(e) The commission shall direct the department to annu-
ally authorize one elk tag of the total number of tags 
available for issuance to nonresidents of the state.
This section shall become operative on July 1, 2025. 
Elk Hunts, Seasons, and Number of Tags 
(T14 CCR §364)
(a) Department Administered General 
Methods Roosevelt Elk Hunts: 
(1) Siskiyou General Methods Roosevelt Elk Hunt: 
(F) Area: In that portion of Siskiyou County within a 
line beginning at the junction of Interstate 5 and 
the California-Oregon state line; east along the 
California-Oregon state line to Hill Road at Ainsworth 
Corner; south on Hill Road to Lava Beds National 
Monument Road; south on Lava Beds National 
Monument Road to USDA Forest Service Road 49; 
south on USDA Forest Service Road 49 to USDA 
Forest Service Road 77; west on USDA Forest Service 
Road 77 to USDA Forest Service Road 15 (Harris 
Spring Road); south on USDA Forest Service Road 
15 to USDA Forest Service Road 13 (Pilgrim Creek 
Road); southwest on USDA Forest Service Road 
13 to Highway 89; northwest on Highway 89 to 
Interstate 5; north on Interstate 5 to the point of 
beginning. 
(2) Northwestern Roosevelt Elk Hunt: 
(A) Area: In those portions of Humboldt and Del Norte 
counties within a line beginning at the intersection 
of Highway 299 and Highway 96; north on Highway 
96 to the Del Norte-Siskiyou county line; north along 
the Del Norte-Siskiyou county line to the California-
Oregon state line; west along the California-Oregon 
state line to the Pacific coastline; south along the 
Pacific coastline to the Humboldt-Mendocino county 
line; east along the Humboldt-Mendocino county line 
to the Humboldt-Trinity county line; north along the 
Humboldt-Trinity county line to Highway 299; west on 
Highway 299 to the point of beginning. 
(3) Marble Mountains General Methods Roosevelt Elk Hunt: 
(A) Area: In those portions of Humboldt, Tehama, 
Trinity, Shasta and Siskiyou Counties within a line 
beginning at the intersection of Interstate 5 and 
the California-Oregon state line; west along the 
California-Oregon state line to the Del Norte county 
line; south along the Del Norte county line to the 
junction of the Siskiyou-Humboldt county line; east 
along the Siskiyou-Humboldt county line to Highway 
96; south on Highway 96 to Highway 299; south on 
Highway 299 to the Humboldt-Trinity county line; 
south along the Humboldt-Trinity county line to 
Highway 36; east on Highway 36 to Interstate 5; 
north on Interstate 5 to the point of beginning. 
(b) Department Administered General 
Methods Rocky Mountain Elk Hunts: 
(1) Northeastern General Methods Rocky Mountain Elk 
Hunt: 
(A) Area: Those portions of Siskiyou, Modoc, Lassen, 
and Shasta Countiescounties within a line be-
ginning in Siskiyou County at the junction of the 
California-Oregon state line and Hill Road at 
Ainsworth Corner; east along the California-Oregon 
state line to the California-Nevada state line; south 
along the California-Nevada state line to Lassen 
County Road 506 Tuledad(Tuledad) Road; west on 
Lassen County Road 506 to Lassen County Road 
512 (Red Rock Road); west on Lassen County 
Elk Hunting
=== page 79 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
79
Road 512 to Lassen County Road 510 (Clark’s Valley 
Road); west on Lassen County Road 510 to Highway 
395 at Madeline; west on Lassen County Road 527 
(Ash Valley Road) to Highway 139/299299/139 in 
Adin; south on Highway 299/139, then Highway 139 
to Highway 36 in Susanville; west on Highway 36 
to Interstate 5 in Red Bluff; north on Interstate 5 to 
Highway 89; southeast on Highway 89 to USDA Forest 
Service Road 13 (Pilgrim Creek Road); northeast on 
USDA Forest Service Road 13 to USDA Forest Service 
Road 15 (Harris Spring Road); north on USDA Forest 
Service Road 15 to USDA Forest Service Road 77; 
east on USDA Forest Service Road 77 to USDA Forest 
Service Road 49; north on USDA Forest Service Road 
49 to Lava Beds National Monument Road; north on 
Lava Beds National Monument Road to Hill Road; 
north on Hill Road to the point of beginning.
(2) Tehachapi Rocky Mountain Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: In those portions of Kern and Los Angeles 
Countiescounties within a line beginning at the inter-
section of Highways 99 and 65; north on Highway 65 to 
the Kern-Tulare county line; east along the Kern-Tulare 
county line to Highway 395; south on Highway 395 to 
Highway 14; southwest on Highway 14 to Highway 138; 
west on Highway 138 to Interstate 5; north on Interstate 
5 to Highway 99; north on Highway 99 to the point of 
beginning.  
(c) Department Administered General 
Methods Roosevelt/Tule Elk Hunt: 
(1) Mendocino General Methods Roosevelt/Tule Elk Hunt: 
(A) Area: In that portion of Mendocino County within 
a line beginning at the Pacific coastline and the 
Mendocino-Humboldt county line south of Shelter 
Cove; east along the Mendocino-Humboldt county 
line to the Mendocino-Trinity county line; south and 
east along the Mendocino-Trinity county line to the 
Mendocino-Tehama county line; south along the 
Mendocino-Glenn county line, then the Mendocino-
Lake county line to Highway 20; north and west on 
Highway 20 to Highway 101 near Calpella; south 
on Highway 101 to Highway 253; southwest on 
Highway 253 to Highway 128; north on Highway 128 
to Mountain View Road near the town of Boonville; 
west on Mountain View Road to Highway 1; south on 
Highway 1 to the junction of the Garcia River; west 
along the Garcia River to the Pacific coastline; north 
along the Pacific coastline to the point of beginning. 
(d) Department Administered General 
Methods Tule Elk Hunts: 
(1) Cache Creek General Methods Tule Elk Hunt: 
(A)  Area: In those portions of Lake, Colusa and Yolo 
Countiescounties within a line beginning at the junc-
tion of Highway 20 and the Colusa-Lake county line 
(County Line Ridge); south along the Colusa-Lake 
county line to the Yolo county line; east along the Yolo 
Countycounty line to Highway 16; south on Highway 
16 to Reiff-Rayhouse Road; west on Reiff-Rayhouse 
Road to Morgan Valley Road; west on Morgan Valley 
Road to Highway 53; north on Highway 53 to Highway 
20; west on Highway 20 to Forest Road 303; north 
and east on Forest Road 303 to Walker Ridge Road; 
south on Walker Ridge Road to Highway 20; east on 
Highway 20 to the point of beginning.
(2) La Panza General Methods Tule Elk Hunt: 
(A) Area: In those portions of San Luis Obispo, Kern, and 
Santa Barbara Counties counties within a line begin-
ning in San Luis Obispo County at the intersection 
of Highway 101 and Highway 46; south on Highway 
101 to Highway 166 in San Luis Obispo County; east 
on Highway 166 to Highway 33 at Maricopa in Kern 
County; north and west on Highway 33 to Highway 
46 in Kern County; west on Highway 46 to the point of 
beginning. 
(B) Special Conditions: All tagholders will be required to 
attend a mandatory orientation. Tagholders will be 
notified of the time and location of the orientation 
meeting upon receipt of their elk license tags. 
(3) Central Coast General Methods Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: In those portions of Monterey and San Luis 
Obispo Countiescounties within a line beginning 
in Monterey County at the junction of Highway 1 
and Elkhorn Slough; westward to the Pacific coast-
line at the Moss Landing Harbor mouth entrance; 
south along the Pacific coastline to the junction of 
the mouth of Santa Rosa Creek in San Luis Obispo 
County; south and east along Santa Rosa Creek 
to the bridge at Highway 1; south on Highway 1 to 
Highway 46; east on Highway 46 to Highway 101; 
north on Highway 101 to North Main Street in Salinas 
in Monterey County; south on North Main Street to 
Highway 183; north on Highway 183 to Highway 1; 
north on Highway 1 to the point of beginning, exclud-
ing the full extent of the Fort Hunter Liggett military 
installation. 
(B) Special Conditions: All tagholders will be required to 
attend a mandatory orientation. Tagholders will be 
notified of the time and location of the orientation 
meeting upon receipt of their elk license tags. 
(C) (4) Gabilan General Methods Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: In those portions of Monterey, San Benito, and 
Fresno Countiescounties within a line beginning in 
Monterey County at the junction of the Pajaro River 
and the Pacific coastline; east along the Pajaro 
River to Highway 25; south on Highway 25 to San 
Felipe Road; south on San Felipe Road to San Benito 
Street; south on San Benito Street to Nash Road; east 
on Nash Road to Highway 25; south on Highway 25 
ELK HUNTING
=== page 80 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
80
to County Road J1 (Panoche Road) near the town 
of Paicines; southeast on County Road J1 to County 
Road J1 (Little Panoche Road); north on County 
Road J1 to Interstate 5 in Fresno County; south on 
Interstate 5 to Highway 33; south on Highway 33 to 
Highway 46; west on Highway 46 to Highway 101; 
north on Highway 101 to North Main Street in Salinas 
in Monterey County; south on North Main Street to 
Highway 183; north on Highway 183 to Highway 
1; north on Highway 1 to the junction with Elkhorn 
Slough; westward to the Pacific coastline at the 
Moss Landing Harbor mouth entrance; north along 
the Pacific coastline to the point of beginning.
(B) Special Conditions: All tagholders will be required to 
attend a mandatory orientation. Tagholders will be 
notified of the time and location of the orientation 
meeting upon receipt of their elk license tags. 
(5) Bishop General Methods Tule Elk Hunt: 
(A) Area: In that portion of Inyo County within a line 
beginning at the intersection of Highway 395 and 
Highway 6 in the town of Bishop; north and east along 
on Highway 6 to Silver Canyon Road; east on Silver 
Canyon Road to Forest Service Road 4S01 (White 
Mountain Road); south on Forest Service Road 4S01 
to Highway 168 at Westgard Pass; south and west on 
Highway 168 to Highway 395; north on Highway 395 to 
the point of beginning. 
(6) Independence General Methods Tule Elk Hunt: 
(A) Area: In that portion of Inyo County within a line 
beginning at the intersection of Highway 395 and 
Aberdeen Station Road; east on Aberdeen Station 
Road to its terminus at the southern boundary of 
Section 5, Township 11S, Range 35E; east along 
the southern boundary of sections 5, 4, 3, and 2, 
Township 11S, Range 35E to the Papoose Flat Road 
at Papoose Flat; south and east on Papoose Flat 
Road to Mazourka Canyon Road; south, then west 
on Mazourka Canyon Road to Highway 395; north 
on Highway 395 to the point of beginning. 
(7) Lone Pine General Methods Tule Elk Hunt:
(A)  Area: In that portion of Inyo County within a line 
beginning at the intersection of Highway 395 
and Mazourka Canyon Road; east, then north on 
Mazourka Canyon Road to the Inyo National Forest 
Boundary at the junction of the southern bound-
ary of Township 12S and the northern boundary of 
Township 13S; east along the southern boundary of 
Township 12S to Saline Valley Road; south on Saline 
Valley Road to Highway 190; north, then southwest 
on Highway 190 to Highway 395 at Olancha; north on 
Highway 395 to the point of beginning.
(8) Tinemaha General Methods Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: In that portion of Inyo County within a line 
beginning at the intersection of Highway 395 and 
Highway 168 in the town of Big Pine; north and east 
on Highway 168 to Death Valley Road; south and 
east on Death Valley Road to Papoose Flat Road; 
south on Papoose Flat Road to the southern bound-
ary of Section 2, Township 11S, Range 35E; west 
along the southern boundaries of Sections 2, 3, 4, 
and 5 to the terminus of Aberdeen Station Road in 
Section 5, Township 11S, Range 35E; south and west 
on Aberdeen Station Road to Highway 395; north on 
Highway 395 to the point of beginning.
(9) West Tinemaha General Methods Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: In that portion of Inyo County within a line 
beginning at the intersection of Highway 395 and 
Highway 168 in the town of Big Pine; south on 
Highway 395 to the north junction of Fish Springs 
Road; south on Fish Springs Road to Highway 395; 
south on Highway 395 to Taboose Creek in Section 
14, Township 11S, Range 34E; west along Taboose 
Creek to the Inyo county line; north and west along 
the Inyo county line to the of Tinemaha Creek; 
east along Tinemaha Creek to the junction with 
McMurray Meadow Road; north on McMurray 
Meadow Road to Glacier Lodge Road; north and 
east on Glacier Lodge Road to Crocker Avenue; 
east on Crocker Avenue to Highway 395; north on 
Highway 395 to the point of beginning.
(10) Tinemaha Mountain General Methods Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: In that portion of Inyo County within a line be-
ginning at the intersection of Forest Service Road 9S21 
(Glacier Lodge Road) and Forest Service Road 9S03 
(McMurray Meadow Road); south on Forest Service 
Road 9S03 to the junction of Tinemaha Creek; west 
along Tinemaha Creek to the Inyo-Fresno county 
line; north and west along the Inyo county line to the 
southeast corner of Section 23, Township 10S, Range 
32E; north along the eastern boundaries of sections 
23, 14, 11, 2, Township 10S, Range 32E, and the east-
ern boundary of Section 36, Township 9S, Range 32E 
to Glacier Lodge Road; east on Glacier Lodge Road 
to the point of beginning.
(11) Whitney General Methods Tule Elk Hunt: 
(A) Area: In that portion of Inyo County within a line begin-
ning at the intersection of Highway 395 and Onion 
Valley Road; south on Highway 395 to Whitney Portal 
Road; west on Whitney Portal Road to the northern 
boundary of Section 36, Township 15S, Range 34E; west 
along the northern boundary of sections 36, 35, 34 and 
33 Township 15S, Range 34 E to the Inyo-Tulare county 
line; north along the the Inyo-Tulare county line to the 
junction of Section 27 Township 13S, range 33E; east 
along the southern boundary of sections 27, 26 and 
25 Township 13S, Range 33E; north along the eastern 
boundary of Section 25 Township 13S, Range 33E to 
Onion Valley Road; east on Onion Valley Road to the 
point of beginning. 
ELK HUNTING
=== page 81 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
81
(12) Goodale General Methods Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: In that portion of Inyo County within a line 
beginning at the intersection of Highway 395 and 
Onion Valley Road; west on Onion Valley Road to 
the junction of the eastern boundary of Section 25 
Township 13S, Range 33E; south along the eastern 
boundary of Section 25 Township 13S, Range 33E to 
the southern boundary of Section 25 Township 13S, 
Range 33E; west along the southern boundary of 
sections 27, 26, 25 Township 13S, Range 33E to the 
Inyo-Fresno county line; north along the Inyo-Fresno 
county line to Taboose Creek; east along Taboose 
Creek to the junction of Highway 395; south on 
Highway 395 to the point of beginning.
(13) Grizzly Island General Methods Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: Those lands owned and managed by the 
Department of Fish and Wildlife as the Grizzly Island 
Wildlife Area.
(B) Special Conditions: All tagholders will be required to 
attend a mandatory orientation. Tagholders will be 
notified of the time and location of the orientation 
meeting after receipt of their elk license tags.
(14) Fort Hunter Liggett General Public General Methods 
Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: That portion of Monterey County lying within 
the exterior boundaries of Fort Hunter Liggett, ex-
cept as restricted by the Commanding Officer.
(B) Fort Hunter Liggett Special Conditions: See subsection 
364(p).
(15) East Park Reservoir General Methods Tule Elk Hunt: 
(A) Area: In those portions of Glenn and Colusa 
Countiescounties within a line beginning in Glenn 
County at the intersection of Interstate 5 and Highway 
162 at Willows; west on Highway 162 (Highway 162 
becomes Alder Springs Road) to the Glenn-Mendocino 
county line; south along the Glenn-Mendocino county 
line to the Glenn-Lake county line; east and then south 
along the Glenn-Lake county line to the Colusa-Lake 
county line; west, and then southeast along the Colusa-
Lake county line to Goat Mountain Road; north and 
east on Goat Mountain Road to Lodoga-Stonyford 
Road; east on Lodoga-Stonyford to Sites-Lodoga Road 
at Lodoga; east on Sites-Lodoga Road to Maxwell-Sites 
Road at Sites; east on Maxwell-Sites Road to Interstate 
5 at Maxwell; north on Interstate 5 to the point of 
beginning. 
(B) Special Conditions: 
1. All tagholders will be required to attend a mandatory 
orientation. Tagholders will be notified of the time 
and location of the orientation meeting after re-
ceipt of their elk license tags. 
2. Access to private land may be restricted or require 
payment of an access fee. 
3. A Colusa County ordinance prohibits firearms (includ-
ing archery equipment) on land administered by 
the USDI Bureau of Reclamation in the vicinity of East 
Park Reservoir. A county variance currently allows for 
the use of muzzleloaders (as defined in Section 353) 
on Bureau of Reclamation land within the hunt zone. 
Hunters are responsible for checking with county 
authorities for any change in the variance. 
(16) San Luis Reservoir General Methods Tule Elk Hunt: 
(A) Area: In those portions of Merced, Fresno, San Benito, 
and Santa Clara Countiescounties within a line begin-
ning in Merced County at the intersection of Highway 
152 and Interstate 5 near the town of Santa Nella; 
west on Highway 152 to Highway 156 in Santa Clara 
County; southwest on Highway 156 to Highway 25 
near the town of Hollister in San Benito County; south 
on Highway 25 to County Road J1 (Panoche Road) in 
the town of Paicines; south and east on County Road 
J1 to County Road J1 (Little Panoche Road); north 
and east on County Road J1 (Little Panoche Road) 
to Interstate 5 in Fresno County; north on Interstate 5 
to the point of beginning. 
(17) Bear Valley General Methods Tule Elk Hunt
(A)  Area: In those portions of Colusa, Lake, and Yolo 
Countiescounties within a line beginning in Colusa 
County at the intersection of Interstate 5 and 
Maxwell-Sites Road at Maxwell; west on Maxwell-
Sites Road to Sites-Lodoga Road; west on Sites-
Lodoga Road to Lodoga-Stonyford Road; west 
Road to Goat Mountain Road; west and south on 
Goat Mountain Road to the Colusa-Lake county 
line; south and west along the Colusa-Lake county 
line to Forest Route M5; south on Forest Route M5 
to Forest Road 303; east on Forest Road 303 to 
Walker Ridge Road; south on Walker Ridge Road 
to Highway 20; east on Highway 20 to the Colusa-
Lake county line (County Line Ridge); south along 
the Colusa-Lake county line to the Yolo county line; 
east along the Yolo county line to Highway 16; south 
on Highway 16 to Rayhouse Road; south and west 
on Rayhouse Road to the Yolo-Napa county line; 
east and south along the Yolo-Napa county line to 
Road 8053; east on Road 8053 to County Road 78A; 
east on County Road 78A to Highway 16; east on 
Highway 16 to Route E4 at Capay; north and east 
on Route E4 to Interstate 5; north on Interstate 5 to 
the point of beginning. 
(18) Lake Pillsbury General Methods Tule Elk Hunt: 
(A) Area: In that portion of Lake County within a line be-
ginning at the Glenn-Lake-Mendocino county line; 
south and west along the Mendocino-Lake county 
line to Highway 20; southeast on Highway 20 to the 
Bartlett Springs Road; north and east on Bartlett 
ELK HUNTING
=== page 82 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
82
Springs Road to Forest Route M5; northwest on Forest 
Route M5 to the Colusa-Lake county line; northwest 
and east along the Colusa-Lake county line to the 
junction of the Glenn county line; north and west on 
along the Lake-Glenn County Line to the point of 
beginning. 
(19) Santa Clara General Methods Tule Elk Hunt: 
(A) Area: In those portions of Merced, Santa Clara, and 
Stanislaus Countiescounties within a line beginning 
at the junction of Interstate 5 and the San Joaquin-
Stanislaus county line; southeast on Interstate 5 to 
Highway 152; west on Highway 152 to Highway 101 
near the town of Gilroy; north on Highway 101 to 
Interstate 680 near San Jose; north on Interstate 680 
to the Alameda-Santa Clara county line; east along 
the Alameda-Santa Clara county line to the junc-
tion of the San Joaquin-Stanislaus-Alameda-Santa 
Clara county lines; northeast along the San Joaquin-
Stanislaus county line to the point of beginning. 
(20) Alameda General Methods Tule Elk Hunt: 
(A) Area: In those portions of Alameda and San Joaquin 
Countiescounties within a line beginning at the junc-
tion of Interstate 5 and the San Joaquin-Stanislaus 
county line; southwest along the San Joaquin-
Stanislaus county line to junction of the San Joaquin-
Stanislaus-Alameda-Santa Clara county lines; west 
along the Alameda-Santa Clara county line to 
Interstate 680; north on Interstate 680 to Interstate 
580; east and south on Interstate 580 to Interstate 5; 
south on Interstate 5 to the point of beginning. 
(e) Department Administered General 
Methods Apprentice Elk Hunts:
(1) Marble Mountains General Methods Roosevelt Elk 
Apprentice Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(a)(3)(A).
(B) Special Conditions: Only persons possessing valid ju-
nior hunting licenses may apply for Apprentice Hunt 
license tags. Apprentice Hunt tagholders under 18 
years of age shall be accompanied by a nonhunt-
ing, licensed adult chaperone 18 years of age or 
older while hunting.
(2) Northeastern General Methods Rocky Mountain Elk 
Apprentice Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(b)(1)(A).
(B) Special Conditions: Only persons possessing valid ju-
nior hunting licenses may apply for Apprentice Hunt 
license tags. Apprentice Hunt tagholders under 18 
years of age shall be accompanied by a nonhunt-
ing, licensed adult chaperone 18 years of age or 
older while hunting.
(3) Cache Creek General Methods Tule Elk Apprentice 
Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(1)(A).
(B) Special Conditions: Only persons possessing valid ju-
nior hunting licenses may apply for Apprentice Hunt 
license tags. Apprentice Hunt tagholders under 18 
years of age shall be accompanied by a nonhunt-
ing, licensed adult chaperone 18 years of age or 
older while hunting.
(4) La Panza General Methods Tule Elk Apprentice Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(2)(A).
(B) Special Conditions:
1. All tagholders will be required to attend a mandatory 
orientation. Tagholders will be notified of the time 
and location of the orientation meeting after re-
ceipt of their elk license tags.
2. Only persons possessing valid junior hunting licens-
es may apply for Apprentice Hunt license tags. 
Apprentice Hunter tagholders under 18 years of age 
shall be accompanied by a nonhunting, licensed 
adult chaperone 18 years of age or older while 
hunting.
(5) Bishop General Methods Tule Elk Apprentice Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(5)(A).
(B) Special Conditions: Only persons possessing valid ju-
nior hunting licenses may apply for Apprentice Hunt 
license tags. Apprentice Hunter tagholders under 18 
years of age shall be accompanied by a nonhunt-
ing, licensed adult chaperone 18 years of age or 
older while hunting.
(6) Grizzly Island General Methods Tule Elk Apprentice 
Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(13)(A).
(B) Special Conditions:
1. All tagholders will be required to attend a mandatory 
orientation. Tagholders will be notified of the time 
and location of the orientation meeting after re-
ceipt of their elk license tags.
2. Only persons possessing valid junior hunting licens-
es may apply for Apprentice Hunt license tags. 
Apprentice Hunt tagholders under 18 years of age 
shall be accompanied by a nonhunting, licensed 
adult chaperone 18 years of age or older while 
hunting.
(7) Fort Hunter Liggett General Methods General Public 
Tule Elk Apprentice Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
ELK HUNTING
=== page 83 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
83
subsection 364(d)(14)(A).
(B) Special Conditions:
1. See subsection 364(p).
2. Only persons possessing valid junior hunting licens-
es may apply for Apprentice Hunt license tags. 
Apprentice Hunt tagholders under 18 years of age 
shall be accompanied by a nonhunting, licensed 
adult chaperone 18 years of age or older while 
hunting.
(f) Department Administered Archery Only Elk 
Hunts:
(1) Northeastern Archery Only Rocky Mountain Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(b)(1)(A).
(B) Special Conditions: Elk may be taken with Archery 
Equipment only as specified in Section 354.
(2) Owens Valley Multiple Zone Archery Only Tule Elk 
Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in Bishop, 
Independence, Lone Pine, and Goodale, as de-
scribed in subsections 364(d)(5)(A), (d)(6)(A), (d)(7)
(A) and (d)(12)(A).
(B) Special Conditions: Elk may be taken with Archery 
Equipment only as specified in Section 354.
(3) Lone Pine Archery Only Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(7)(A).
(B) Special Conditions: Elk may be taken with Archery 
Equipment only as specified in Section 354.
(4) Tinemaha Archery Only Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(8)(A).
(B) Special Conditions: Elk may be taken with Archery 
Equipment only as specified in Section 354.
(5) Whitney Archery Only Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(11)(A).
(B) Special Conditions: Elk may be taken with Archery 
Equipment only as specified in Section 354.
(6) Fort Hunter Liggett General Public Archery Only Tule 
Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(14)(A).
(B) Special Conditions:
1. See subsection 364(p).
2. Elk may be taken with Archery Equipment only as 
specified in Section 354.
ELK HUNTING
(g) Department Administered Muzzleloader 
Only Elk Hunts:
(1) Bishop Muzzleloader Only Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(5)(A).
(B) Special Conditions: Elk may be taken with muzzle-
loader equipment only as specified in Section 353.
(2) Independence Muzzleloader Only Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(6)(A).
(B) Special Conditions: Elk may be taken with muzzle-
loader equipment only as specified in Section 353.
(3) Fort Hunter Liggett General Public Muzzleloader Only 
Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(14)(A).
(B) Special Conditions:
1. See subsection 364(p).
2. Elk may be taken with Muzzleloader Equipment only 
as specified in Section 353.
(h) Department Administered Muzzleloader/
Archery Only Roosevelt Elk Hunts:
(1) Marble Mountains Muzzleloader/Archery Only 
Roosevelt Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(a)(3)(A).
(B) Special Conditions: Elk may be taken with archery or 
muzzleloader equipment only as specified in Sections 
353 and 354.
(i) Fundraising Elk Hunts:
(1) Multi-zone Fundraising Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the areas described in 
subsections 364(a)(1)(A), (a)(2)(A), (a)(3)(A), (b)(1)
(A), and (d)(2)(A).
(2) Grizzly Island Fundraising Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(13)(A).
(B) Special Conditions: Advance reservations required 
by contacting the Grizzly Island Wildlife Area by tele-
phone at (707) 425-3828.
(3) Owens Valley Fundraising Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in Bishop, 
Independence, Lone Pine, Tinemaha, West 
Tinemaha, Tinemaha Mountain, Whitney, and 
Goodale as described in subsections 364(d)(5)(A), 
(d)(6)(A), (d)(7)(A), (d)(8)(A), (d)(9)(A), (d)(10)(A), 
(d)(11)(A), and (d)(12)(A).
=== page 84 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
84
ELK HUNTING
(j) Military Only Elk Hunts:
These hunts are sponsored by and tag quotas are set by 
the Department. The tags are assigned by and the hunts 
are administered by the Department of Defense.
(1) Fort Hunter Liggett Military Only General Methods 
Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(14)(A).
(B) Special Conditions: See subsection 364(p).
(2) Fort Hunter Liggett Military Only General Methods 
Tule Elk Apprentice Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(14)(A).
(B) Special Conditions:
1. See subsection 364(p).
2. Only persons possessing valid junior hunting licens-
es may apply for Apprentice Hunt license tags. 
Apprentice Hunt tagholders shall be accompanied 
by a nonhunting, licensed adult chaperone 18 years 
of age or older while hunting.
(3) Fort Hunter Liggett Military Only Archery Only Tule Elk 
Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(14)(A).
(B) Special Conditions:
1. See subsection 364(p).
2. Elk may be taken with Archery Equipment only as 
specified in Section 354.
(4) Fort Hunter Liggett Military Only Muzzleloader Only 
Tule Elk Hunt:
(A) Area: The tag shall be valid in the area described in 
subsection 364(d)(14)(A).
(B) Special Conditions: See subsection 364(p).
(k) Bag and Possession Limit: 
Each elk tag is valid only for one elk per season and only 
in the hunt area drawn, and an individual shall only be 
eligible for one elk tag per season through section 364.
(l) Definitions:
(1) Bull elk: Any elk having an antler or antlers at least 
four inches in length as measured from the top of 
the skull.
(2) Spike bull: A bull elk having no more than one point 
on each antler. An antler point is a projection of the 
antler at least one inch long and longer than the 
width of its base.
(3) Antlerless elk: Any elk, with the exception of spotted 
calves, with antlers less than four inches in length as 
measured from the top of the skull.
(4) Either-sex elk: For the purposes of these regulations, 
either-sex is defined as bull elk, spike elk, or antlerless 
elk.
(m) Method of Take: 
Only methods for taking elk as defined in Sections 353 
and 354 may be used.
(n) Tagholder Responsibilities:
(1) No tagholder shall take or possess any elk or parts 
thereof governed by the regulations except herein 
provided.
(2) The department reserves the right to use any part 
of the tagholder’s elk for biological analysis as long 
as the amount of edible meat is not appreciably 
decreased.
(3) Any person taking an elk which has a collar or other 
marking device attached to it shall provide the de-
partment with such marking device within 10 days of 
taking the elk.
(o) The use of dogs to take or attempt to take 
elk is prohibited.
(p) Fort Hunter Liggett Special Conditions:
(1) All tagholders hunting within the exterior boundar-
ies of Fort Hunter Liggett will be required to attend 
a mandatory hunter orientation. Tagholders will be 
notified of the time and location of the orientation 
meeting upon receipt of their elk license tags.
(2) Tagholders hunting within the exterior boundaries 
of Fort Hunter Liggett shall be required to purchase 
an annual hunting pass available from Fort Hunter 
Liggett.
(3) All successful tagholders hunting within the exterior 
boundaries of Fort Hunter will be required to have 
their tags validated on Fort Hunter Liggett prior to 
leaving.
(4) Due to military operations and training, the specified 
season dates within the exterior boundaries of Fort 
Hunter Liggett are subject to further restriction, can-
cellation, or may be rescheduled, between August 
1 and January 31, by the Commanding Officer.
=== page 85 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
85
2026 ELK HUNTS
Apprentice Hunts
Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 2026 Hunt Dates
Bishop Period 2 Apprentice – General – Bull 1 Oct 03 - Oct 11
Cache Creek Apprentice - Bull (Tule) 1 Oct 10 - Oct 25
Fort Hunter Liggett Apprentice - Antlerless (Tule) 1 Dec 22 - Jan 03
Fort Hunter Liggett Apprentice - Bull (Tule) 1 Dec 22 - Jan 03
Grizzly Island Apprentice - Period 1 - Antlerless (Tule) 2 Aug 11 - Aug 14
Grizzly Island Apprentice - Period 2 - Spike Bull (Tule) 2 Aug 13 - Aug 16
La Panza Apprentice Period 1 - Spike Bull (Tule) 1 Oct 10 - Nov 01
Marble Mountains Apprentice - Either-sex (Roosevelt) 4 Sep 09 - Sep 20
Northeastern Apprentice - Either-sex (Rocky Mountain) 2 Sep 16 - Sep 27
Archery Hunts
Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 2026 Hunt Dates
Central Coast Archery Bull (Tule) 5 Sep 01 - Sep 30
Central Coast Archery Antlerless (Tule) 5 Sep 01 - Sep 30
Fort Hunter Liggett Archery Antlerless (Tule) 8 Nov 07 - Nov 15
Fort Hunter Liggett Archery Either-sex (Tule) 6 Aug 01-Aug 09
La Panza Archery Bull (Tule) 5 Sep 01 - Sep 30
La Panza Archery Antlerless (Tule) 5 Sep 01 - Sep 30
Lone Pine Period 1 Archery Antlerless (Tule) 2 Sep 12 - Sep 27
Lone Pine Period 1 Archery - Bull 2 Sep 12 - Sep 27
Northeastern Archery - Either-sex (Rocky Mountain) 10 Sep 02 - Sep 13
Owens Valley Multiple Zone Archery - Bull (Tule) 5 Aug 08 - Aug 16
Siskiyou Archery Bull 10 Aug 26 - Sep 08
Tinemaha Period 1 – Archery – Bull 1 Sep 12 - Sep 27
Whitney Period 1 – Archery Only – Bull 2 Sep 12 - Sep 27
=== page 86 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
86
2026 ELK HUNTS
Muzzleloader/Archery Hunts - Roosevelt Elk
Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 2026 Hunt Dates
Marble Mountains - Muzzleloader/Archery - Either-sex 10 Oct 31- Nov 08
Muzzleloader Hunts - Tule Elk
Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 2026 Hunt Dates
Bishop Period 1 – Muzzleloader – Bull 1 Sept 12 - Sept 27
Independence Period 1 Muzzleloader Bull 1 Sep 12 - Sep 27
General Methods Hunts - Roosevelt Elk
Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 2026 Hunt Dates
Marble Mountains General Methods - Antlerless 8 Sep 09 - Sep 20
Marble Mountains General Methods - Bull 34 Sep 09 - Sep 20
Northwestern General Methods - Antlerless 15 Sep 02 - Sep 24
Northwestern General Methods - Bull 25 Sep 02 - Sep 24
Northwestern General Methods - Either-sex 3 Sep 02 - Sep 24
Siskiyou General Methods - Antlerless 30 Sep 09 - Sep 20
Siskiyou General Methods Bull 20 Oct 07 - Oct 18
General Methods Hunts- Roosevelt/Tule Elk
Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 2026 Hunt Dates
Mendocino General Methods - Bull 2 Sep 23 - Oct 04
General Methods Hunts- Rocky Mountain Elk
Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 2026 Hunt Dates
Northeastern General Methods - Antlerless 10 Nov 11 - Nov 22
Northeastern General Methods - Bull 15 Sep 16 - Sep 27
Tehachapi General Methods - Antlerless 10 Sep 05 - Oct 04
Tehachapi General Methods - Bull 10 Sep 05 - Oct 04
=== page 87 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
87
2026 ELK HUNTS
General Methods Hunts - Tule Elk
Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 2026 Hunt Dates
Bear Valley General Methods - Antlerless 1 Oct 10 - Oct 18
Bear Valley General Methods - Bull 2 Oct 10 - Oct 18
Bishop Period 4 – General Methods – Bull 2 Nov 07 - Nov 15
Bishop Period 3 – General Methods – Bull 2 Oct 17 - Oct 25
Cache Creek Period 1 General Methods - Bull 2 Oct 10 - Oct 25
Cache Creek Period 2 General Methods - Antlerless 2 Oct 17 - Nov 01
Central Coast General Methods - Antlerless 10 Oct 03 - Dec 01
Central Coast General Methods Bull 10 Oct 03 - Dec 01
East Park Reservoir General Methods Antlerless 2 Sep 05 - Oct 01
East Park Reservoir General Methods Bull 2 Sep 05 - Oct 01
Fort Hunter Liggett Period 2 General Methods Antlerless 6 Nov 21 - Nov 29
Fort Hunter Liggett Period 3 General Methods Bull 8 Dec 22 - Jan 03
Gabilan General Methods Antlerless 6 Sep 22 - Sep 25
Gabilan General Methods Bull 10 Sep 22 - Sep 25
Goodale Period 1 General Methods Bull 1 Oct 03 - Oct 11
Goodale Period 2 General Methods Antlerless 1 Oct 03 - Oct 11
Goodale Period 3 General Methods Antlerless 1 Oct 17 - Oct 25
Grizzly Island Period 1 General Methods Antlerless 2 Aug 11 - Aug 14
Grizzly Island Period 2 General Methods Spike Bull 2 Aug 13 - Aug 16
Grizzly Island Period 8 General Methods Spike Bull 6 Sep 03 - Sep 06
Grizzly Island Period 9 General Methods Antlerless 4 Sep 08 - Sep 11
Grizzly Island Period 10 General Methods Bull 4 Sep 10 - Sep 13
Grizzly Island Period 11 General Methods Antlerless 4 Sep 15 - Sep 18
Grizzly Island Period 12 General Methods Bull 4 Sep 17 - Sep 20
Grizzly Island Period 13 General Methods Antlerless 4 Sep 22 - Sep 25
Grizzly Island Period 13 General Methods Bull 3 Sep 22 - Sep 25
Independence Period 2 General Methods Antlerless 1 Oct 03 - Oct 11
Independence Period 2 General Methods Bull 2 Oct 03 - Oct 11
Independence Period 3 General Methods Antlerless 1 Oct 17 - Oct 25
=== page 88 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
88
General Methods Hunts - Tule Elk
Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 2026 Hunt Dates
Independence Period 3 General Methods Bull 1 Oct 17 - Oct 25
La Panza Period 1 General Methods Antlerless 5 Oct 10 - Nov 01
La Panza Period 1 General Methods Bull 6 Oct 10 - Nov 01
La Panza Period 2 General Methods Antlerless 6 Nov 14 - Dec 06
La Panza Period 2 General Methods Bull 6 Nov 14 - Dec 06
Lake Pillsbury Period 1 General Methods Antlerless 4 Aug 29  - Sep 04
Lake Pillsbury Period 2 General Methods Antlerless 2 Sep 05 - Sep 11
Lake Pillsbury Period 3 General Methods Antlerless 2 Sep 12 - Sep 18
Lake Pillsbury Period 4 General Methods Bull 2 Sep 26 - Oct 02
Lake Pillsbury Period 5 General Methods Bull 2 Oct 03 - Oct 09
Lone Pine Period 2 General Methods Bull 2 Oct 03 - Oct 11
Lone Pine Period 3 – General Methods – Bull 1 Oct 17 - Oct 25
San Luis Reservoir General Methods Either-sex- 5 Oct 03 - Oct 25
Tinemaha Period 2 – General Methods – Bull 1 Oct 03 - Oct 11
Tinemaha Mountain Period 1 – General Methods – Bull 1 Sept 12 - Sept 27
Tinemaha Mountain Period 2 – General Methods – Bull 1 Oct 03 - Oct 11
West Tinemaha Period 1 General Methods Bull 2 Sep 12 - Sep 27
West Tinemaha Period 2 – General Methods – Bull 2 Oct 03 - Oct 11
West Tinemaha Period 3 – General Methods – Bull 2 Oct 17 - Oct 25
Whitney Period 2 General Methods Bull 2 Oct 03 - Oct 11
Whitney Period 3 General Methods Antlerless 1 Oct 17 - Oct 25
2026 ELK HUNTS
=== page 89 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
89
Siskiyou
Lassen
Modoc
Shasta
Plumas
Pronghorn Hunt Zones
Mount Dome
Clear Lake
Likely Tables
Lassen
Big Valley
Surprise
Valley
Closed To Pronghorn Hunting
Lassen Apprentice, Surprise 
Valley Apprentice, Big Valley 
Apprentice Hunt and Likely 
Tables Apprentice
1
2
3
4
5
6
1 2
3
4
5
6
PRONGHORN ANTELOPE HUNT ZONES
PRONGHORN
Effective July 1, 2019, it shall 
be unlawful to use, or pos -
sess with any firearm capa -
ble of firing, any projectile(s) 
not certified as nonlead 
when taking any wildlife for 
any purpose in this state. For 
more information please re -
fer to the California Code of 
Regulations Title 14 Section 
250.1 and Fish and Game 
Code Section 3004.5.
Information on these pronghorn hunts can be found 
at wildlife.ca.gov/hunting/pronghorn
Pronghorn Antelope Hunt Zones
=== page 90 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
90
PRONGHORN ANTELOPE HUNTING
Pronghorn antelope tags; Fee (FGC 
§331)
(a) The commission may determine and fix the area or 
areas, the seasons and hours, the bag and possession 
limit, and the sex and total number of pronghorn an-
telope (Antilocapra americana) that may be taken 
under regulations that the commission may adopt 
from time to time. Only a person possessing a valid 
hunting license, who has not received a pronghorn 
antelope tag under these provisions during a period 
of time specified by the commission, may obtain a 
tag for the taking of pronghorn antelope.
(b) The department may issue a pronghorn antelope 
tag upon payment of a fee. The fee for a pronghorn 
antelope tag shall be fifty-five dollars ($55) for a 
resident of the state, as adjusted under Section 713. 
On or before July 1, 2007, the commission shall, by 
regulation, fix the fee for a nonresident of the state 
at not less than a fee of three hundred fifty dol-
lars ($350), as adjusted under Section 713. The fees 
shall be deposited in the Big Game Management 
Account established in Section 3953 and, upon ap-
propriation by the Legislature, shall be expended, in 
addition to moneys budgeted for salaries of persons 
in the department as set forth in Section 3953.
(c) The commission shall direct the department to annu-
ally authorize not less than one pronghorn antelope 
tag or more than 1 percent of the total number of 
tags available for the purpose of raising funds for 
programs and projects to benefit pronghorn ante-
lope. These tags may be sold at auction to residents 
or nonresidents of the state or by another method 
and are not subject to the fee limitation prescribed 
in subdivision (b). All revenues from sales pursuant to 
this subdivision shall be deposited in the Big Game 
Management Account established in Section 3953 
and, upon appropriation by the Legislature, shall be 
expended as set forth in that section.
(d) The commission shall direct the department to an-
nually authorize one pronghorn antelope tag of 
the total number of tags available for issuance to 
nonresidents of the state.
(e) This section shall become operative on July 1, 2025.
Pronghorn Antelope (T14 CCR §363) 
The Lava Beds National Monument and Federal and 
State Game Refuges lying within a given pronghorn hunt 
boundary are closed to pronghorn antelope hunting, ex-
cept for the state’s Hayden Hill (1S) and Blacks Mountain 
(1F) game refuges in Lassen County and the Clear Lake 
National Wildlife Refuge in Modoc County. Refer to sub -
section 363(b)(5) for special conditions for permission to 
enter and hunt pronghorn antelope in the Clear Lake 
National Wildlife Refuge. 
(a) Zone 1 (Mount Dome):
(1) Area:
That portion of Siskiyou County within a line beginning 
at the junction of Interstate 5 and the California-Oregon 
state line; east along the California-Oregon state line to 
the Ainsworth Corners-Lava Beds National Monument 
Road; south on the Ainsworth Corners-Lava Beds 
National Monument Road to Mammoth Crater-Medicine 
Lake Road; southwest on Mammoth Crater-Medicine 
Lake Road to Medicine Lake-Telephone Flat Road; east 
and south on Medicine Lake-Telephone Flat Road to 
Telephone Flat-Bartle Road; southwest on Telephone 
Flat-Bartle Road to Highway 89; west on Highway 89 to 
Interstate 5; north on Interstate 5 to the California-Oregon 
state line to the point of beginning. 
(2) Seasons: 
(F) The general season shall open on the Saturday fol-
lowing the third Wednesday in August and continue 
for nine consecutive days. 
(G) The archery only season shall open 14 days prior to 
the general season and continue for nine consecu-
tive days. 
(3) Bag and Possession Limit: 
One pronghorn antelope in a license year. 
(b) Zone 2 (Clear Lake):
(1) Area: 
Those portions of Modoc and Siskiyou counties within a 
line beginning at the junction of the Lava Beds National 
Monument Road and the California-Oregon state line 
at Ainsworth Corners; east along the California-Oregon 
state line to Crowder Flat Road; south on Crowder Flat 
Road to Modoc County Road 73; south on Modoc 
County Road 73 to Modoc County Road 136; west on 
Modoc County Road 136 to Blue Mountain-Mowitz 
Road; west and south on Blue Mountain-Mowitz Road 
to Deadhorse Flat-Badger Well Road; southwest on 
Deadhorse Flat-Badger Well Road to Badger Well-Browns 
Well Road; south on Badger Well-Browns Well Road to 
Sorholus Tank-Hackamore Road; southwest on Sorholus 
Tank-Hackamore Road to Highway 139; southeast on 
Highway 139 to Modoc County Road 91; south on Modoc 
County Road 91 to the Mud Lake-Mud Springs Road; 
west on Mud Lake-Mud Springs Road to the North Main 
Road; southwest on North Main Road to Long Bell-Iodine 
Prairie Road at Long Bell Forest Service Station; northwest 
on Long Bell-Iodine Prairie Road to Bartle-Telephone Flat 
Road; north on Bartle-Telephone Flat Road to Telephone 
Flat-Medicine Lake Road; north and west on Telephone 
Flat-Medicine Lake Road to Medicine Lake-Mammoth 
Crater Road; northeast on Medicine Lake-Mammoth 
Crater Road to Lava Beds National Monument-Ainsworth 
Corners Road; north on Lava Beds National Monument-
Ainsworth Corners Road to the California-Oregon state 
line to the point of beginning. 
Pronghorn Antelope Hunting
=== page 91 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
91
(2) Seasons: 
(A) The general season shall open on the Saturday fol-
lowing the third Wednesday in August and continue 
for nine consecutive days. 
(B) The archery only season shall open 14 days prior to 
the general season and continue for nine consecu-
tive days. 
(3) Bag and Possession Limit: 
One pronghorn antelope in a license year. 
(4) Special Conditions: 
The special regulations regarding the Peninsula “U” portion 
of the Clear Lake National Wildlife Refuge are summarized 
as follows: 
(A) The area will be open on weekends and holidays 
only during the general season. 
(B) Permission to enter this area must be obtained at 
the gate entrance located on the Clear Lake Road. 
Hunters for this area will be selected by public draw-
ing. Persons selected for pronghorn antelope tags 
for Zone 2 (Clear Lake) may apply for this drawing 
by submitting an application upon receipt of their 
license tag to the Department of Fish and Game 
Department of Fish and Wildlife, 601 Locust Street, 
Redding, CA 96001. Applicants may apply as a par-
ty of two. Applications shall consist of the following: 
a standard U.S. Postal Service postcard with the ap-
plicant’s tag number, name, address, city, zip code, 
area code, telephone number, and the notation 
“Application for Pronghorn Antelope Hunt Access 
Permit, Clear Lake Peninsula.” Applications must 
reach the Redding office before the close of the 
business day on the first Friday in August. Successful 
applicants will be notified. A two-party application 
will not be split. The specific number of hunters will 
be determined each year by the Department. No 
more than five hunters will be allowed on the area 
at any one time unless a party of two is drawn for 
the fifth place. If the fifth place is the first member 
of a party, then no more than six hunters will be al-
lowed on the area at any time. 
(C) The gate entrance will be open from 6:00 a.m. to 
one hour after sunset. 
(D) The fence near the gate entrance constitutes the 
south boundary of the area. 
(E) The specific number of pronghorn antelope to be 
taken from this area is determined by the number of 
pronghorn antelope present. This area will be closed 
once this number is reached. 
(c) Zone 3 (Likely Tables):
(1) Area: 
Those portions of Modoc and Lassen counties within a 
line beginning at the junction of the Crowder Flat Road 
and the California-Oregon state line; east along the 
California-Oregon state line to the crest of the Warner 
Mountains; south along the crest of the Warner Mountains 
to the Summit Trail at Pepperdine Camp; south along the 
Summit Trail to the South Warner Road near Patterson 
Forest Service Station; west along the South Warner Road 
to Long Valley-Clarks Valley Road; south on Long Valley-
Clarks Valley Road to Clarks Valley-Madeline Road; west 
on Clarks Valley-Madeline Road to Highway 395 at the 
town of Madeline; north on Highway 395 to Madeline-Adin 
Road; northwest on Madeline-Adin Road to Hunsinger 
Draw-Sweagert Flat Road; east and north on Hunsinger 
Draw-Sweagert Flat Road to Sweagert Flat-Hunters Ridge 
Road; north and west on Sweagert Flat-Hunters Ridge 
Road to Highway 299 near Lower Rush Creek Recreation 
Site; north on Highway 299 to Canby Bridge-Cottonwood 
Flat Road; northwest on Canby Bridge-Cottonwood Flat 
Road to Cottonwood Flat-Happy Camp Road; north -
west on Cottonwood Flat-Happy Camp Road to Modoc 
County Road 91; north on Modoc County Road 91 to 
Highway 139; north on Highway 139 to on Hackamore-
Sorholus Tank Road; northeast on Hackamore-Sorholus 
Tank Road to Browns Well-Badger Well Road; north on 
Browns Well-Badger Well Road to Badger Well-Deadhorse 
Flat Road; northeast and east on Badger Well-Deadhorse 
Flat Road to Mowitz-Blue Mountain Road; north and east 
on Mowitz-Blue Mountain Road to Modoc County Road 
136; east on Modoc County Road 136 to Modoc County 
Road 73; north on Modoc County Road 73 to Crowder 
Flat Road; north on Crowder Flat Road to the California-
Oregon state line, to the point of beginning. 
(2) Seasons: 
(A) Period One of the general season shall open on 
the Saturday following the third Wednesday in August 
and continue for nine consecutive days. Period Two of 
the general season shall open on the first Saturday in 
September and continue for nine consecutive days. 
(B) The archery only season shall open 14 days prior to the ear-
liest general season and continue for nine consecutive days. 
(3) Bag and Possession Limit: 
One pronghorn antelope in a license year. 
(d) Zone 4 (Lassen):
(1) Area: 
Those portions of Lassen, Plumas and Shasta coun -
ties within a line beginning at the junction intersection 
of Highway 36 and tJuniper Lake Road in the town of 
Chester; north on Juniper Lake Road to the Lassen 
National Park boundary; north and west along the 
Lassen National Park boundary to Highway 89; north on 
Highway 89 to U.S. Forest Service Road 22 near the Hat 
Creek Ranger Station; east on U.S. Forest Service Road 22 
to U.S. Forest Service Road 35N06; east and north on U.S. 
Forest Service Road 35N06 to the State Game Refuge 
1S boundary; northwest along the State Game Refuge 
1S boundary to the Coyote Canyon-Dixie Valley Road; 
PRONGHORN ANTELOPE HUNTING
=== page 92 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
92
northwest on Coyote Canyon-Dixie Valley Road to Dixie 
Valley-Boyd Hill Road; northwest on Dixie Valley-Boyd Hill 
Road to Snag Hill-Hayden Hill Road; northeast and north 
on Snag Hill-Hayden Hill Road to Highway 139; southeast 
on Highway 139 to Willow Creek-Hunsinger Flat Road; 
northeast and northwest on Willow Creek-Hunsinger 
Flat Road to Adin-Madeline Road; southeast on Adin-
Madeline Road to Highway 395 at the town of Madeline; 
south on Highway 395 to Madeline-Clarks Valley Road; 
east on Madeline-Clarks Valley Road to Clarks Valley-
Tuledad Road; east and southeast on Clarks Valley-
Tuledad Road to the California-Nevada state line; south 
along the California-Nevada state line to the Lassen-
Sierra county line; west along the Lassen-Sierra county 
line to the Lassen-Plumas county line; north and west 
along the Lassen-Plumas county line to Highway 36; 
west on Highway 36 to the Juniper Lake Road, to the 
point of beginning. 
(2) Seasons: 
(A) Period One of the general season shall open on the 
Saturday following the third Wednesday in August 
and continue for nine consecutive days. Period 
Two of the general season shall open on the first 
Saturday in September and continue for nine con-
secutive days. 
(B) The archery only season shall open 14 days prior to the 
earliest general season and continue for nine con-
secutive days. 
(3) Bag and Possession Limit: 
One pronghorn antelope in a license year. 
(e) Zone 5 (Big Valley): 
(1) Area: 
Those portions of Modoc, Lassen, Shasta, and Siskiyou 
counties within a line beginning at the intersection of 
Highways 299 and 89; north and northwest on Highway 
89 to Bartle-Telephone Flat Road; northeast on Bartle-
Telephone Flat Road to Iodine Prairie-Long Bell Road; 
southeast on Iodine Prairie-Long Bell Road to North Main 
Road at Long Bell Forest Service Station; northeast on 
North Main Road and Mud Springs-Mud Lake Road to 
Modoc County Road 91; south on Modoc County Road 
91 to Happy Camp-Cottonwood Flat Road; southeast on 
Happy Camp-Cottonwood Flat Road to Cottonwood 
Flat-Canby Bridge Road; southeast on Cottonwood Flat-
Canby Bridge Road to Highway 299; south on Highway 
299 to Hunters Ridge-Sweagert Flat Road near Lower 
Rush Creek Recreation Site; east and south on Hunters 
Ridge-Sweagert Flat Road to Sweagert Flat-Hunsinger 
Draw Road; south and west on Sweagert Flat-Hunsinger 
Draw Road to Adin-Madeline Road; southeast on Adin-
Madeline Road to Hunsinger Flat-Willow Creek Road; 
southeast and southwest on Hunsinger Flat-Willow Creek 
Road to Highway 139; northwest on Highway 139 to 
Hayden Hill-Snag Hill Road; south and southwest on 
Hayden Hill-Snag Hill Road to Boyd Hill-Dixie Valley Road; 
southeast on Boyd Hill-Dixie Valley Road to Dixie Valley-
Coyote Canyon Road; southeast on Dixie Valley-Coyote 
Canyon Road to the State Game Refuge 1S boundary; 
southeast along the State Game Refuge 1S boundary to 
U.S. Forest Service Road 35N06; south and west on U.S. 
Forest Service Road 35N06 to U.S. Forest Service Road 22; 
west on U.S. Forest Service Road 22 to Highway 89 near 
the Hat Creek Ranger Station; north on Highway 89 to 
Highway 299, to the point of beginning. 
(2) Seasons: 
(A) The general season shall open on the Saturday fol-
lowing the third Wednesday in August and continue 
for nine consecutive days. 
(B) The archery only season shall open 14 days prior to 
the earliest general season and continue for nine 
consecutive days. 
(3) Bag and Possession Limit: 
One pronghorn antelope in a license year. 
(f) Zone 6 (Surprise Valley):
(1) Area: 
Those portions of Modoc and Lassen counties within a 
line beginning at the intersection junction of the crest of 
the Warner Mountains and the California-Oregon state 
line; east along the California-Oregon state line to the 
California-Nevada state line; south along the California-
Nevada state line to Tuledad-Clarks Valley Road; west 
and northwest on Tuledad-Clarks Valley Road to Clarks 
Valley-Long Valley Road; north on Clarks Valley-Long 
Valley Road to South Warner Road; east on South Warner 
Road to the Summit Trail near Patterson Guard Station; 
north along the Summit Trail to the crest of the Warner 
Mountains at Pepperdine Camp; north along the crest of 
the Warner Mountains to the California-Oregon state line 
to the point of beginning. 
(2) Seasons: 
(A) The general season shall open on the Saturday fol-
lowing the third Wednesday in August and continue 
for nine consecutive days. 
(B) The archery only season shall open 14 days prior to 
the general season and continue for nine consecu-
tive days. 
(3) Bag and Possession Limit: 
One pronghorn antelope in a license year. 
(g) Big Valley Pronghorn Antelope Apprentice 
Hunt: 
(1) Area: 
The tag shall be valid in the area described in subsection 
363(e)(1). 
PRONGHORN ANTELOPE HUNTING
=== page 93 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
93
(2) Season: 
The season shall open on the Saturday following the third 
Wednesday in August and continue for nine consecutive days. 
(3) Bag and Possession Limit: 
One pronghorn antelope in a license year. 
(4) Special Conditions: 
Tagholders wishing to hunt the Ash Creek Wildlife Area may 
contact Ash Creek Wildlife Area by telephone at (530) 
294-5824, and shall attend an orientation meeting be -
fore hunting. Only persons possessing valid junior hunting 
licenses and apprentice hunt license tags may hunt dur-
ing the pronghorn antelope apprentice hunt season in the 
Ash Creek Wildlife Area. Tagholders shall be accompanied 
by a nonhunting, licensed adult chaperon chaperone 18 
years of age or older while hunting. 
(h) Lassen Pronghorn Antelope Apprentice 
Hunt: 
(1) Area: 
The tag shall be valid in the area described in subsection 
363(d)(1). 
(2) Season: 
The season shall open on the Saturday following the third 
Wednesday in August and continue for nine consecutive days. 
(3) Bag and Possession Limit: 
One pronghorn antelope in a license year. 
(4) Special Conditions: 
Tagholders must possess valid junior hunting licenses and 
apprentice hunt license tags. Tagholders shall be ac -
companied by a nonhunting, licensed adult chaperon 
chaperone 18 years of age or older while hunting. The 
Honey Lake Wildlife Area shall not be open to antelope 
apprentice hunt tag holders. 
(i) Surprise Valley Pronghorn Antelope 
Apprentice Hunt: 
(1) Area: 
The tag shall be valid in the area described in subsection 
363(f)(1). 
(2) Season: 
The season shall open on the Saturday following the third 
Wednesday in August and continue for nine consecutive days. 
(3) Bag and Possession Limit: 
One pronghorn antelope in a license year. 
(4) Special Conditions: 
Tagholders must possess valid junior hunting licenses 
and apprentice hunt license tags. Tagholders shall be 
accompanied by a nonhunting, licensed adult chap -
eron chaperone 18 years of age or older while hunting. 
(j) Likely Tables Pronghorn Antelope Apprentice 
Hunt 
(1) Area: 
The tag shall be valid in the area described in subsection 
363(c)(1). 
(2) Seasons: 
The season shall open on the Saturday following the third 
Wednesday in August and continue for nine consecutive days. 
(3) Bag and Possession Limit: 
One pronghorn antelope in a license year. 
(4) Special Conditions: 
Tagholders must possess valid junior hunting licenses and 
apprentice hunt license tags. Tagholders shall be ac -
companied by a nonhunting, licensed adult chaperon 
chaperone 18 years of age or older while hunting. 
(k) Fundraising Hunt: 
(1) Area: 
Those portions of Lassen, Modoc, Plumas, Shasta, and 
Siskiyou counties described as zones 1 through 6 in sub -
sections 363(a) through (f). 
(2) Season: 
The season for the Fundraising Hunt shall open on the 
Saturday before the first Wednesday in August and con-
tinue for 51 consecutive days. 
(3) Bag and Possession Limit: 
One pronghorn antelope in a license year. 
(l) Conditions: 
(1) Pronghorn antelope license tags do not give the tag-
holders the right of entry onto privately-owned lands. 
(2) Buck pronghorn antelope are defined as prong-
horn antelope with horns longer than the ears. Doe 
pronghorn antelope are defined as pronghorn 
antelope with horns shorter than the ears. Either-sex 
pronghorn antelope are defined as buck or doe 
pronghorn antelope. 
(3) Shooting time shall be from one-half hour before 
sunrise to onehalf one-half hour after sunset. 
(4) Method of take: 
(A) The holder of any archery-only pronghorn antelope 
license tag may only take pronghorn antelope us-
ing archery equipment, as defined in Section 354 of 
these regulations. 
(B) The holder of a general season, fundraising hunt 
PRONGHORN ANTELOPE HUNTING
=== page 94 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
94
2026 PRONGHORN ANTELOPE HUNTS
Apprentice Hunts
Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 2026 Hunt Dates
Zone 4 Lassen Period 1 Either-sex Apprentice 5 Aug 22 - Aug 30
Zone 5 Big Valley Either-sex Apprentice 1 Aug 22 - Aug 30
Zone 6 Surprise Valley Either-sex Apprentice 4 Aug 22 - Aug 30
Archery Hunts
Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 2026 Hunt Dates
Zone 2 Clear Lake Archery Buck 1 Aug 08 - Aug 16
Zone 4 Lassen Archery Buck 5 Aug 08 - Aug 16
Zone 5 Big Valley Archery Buck 1 Aug 08 - Aug 16
Zone 6 Surprise Valley Archery Buck 1 Aug 08 - Aug 16
General Methods Hunts
Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 2026 Hunt Dates
Zone 1 Mount Dome General Methods Buck 2 Aug 22 - Aug 30
Zone 2 Clear Lake General Methods Buck 6 Aug 22 - Aug 30
Zone 3 Likely Tables Period 1 General Methods Buck 5 Aug 22 - Aug 30
Zone 4 Lassen Period 1 General Methods Buck 35 Aug 22 - Aug 30
Zone 4 Lassen Period 2 General Methods Buck 35 Sep 05 - Sep 13
Zone 5 Big Valley General Methods Buck 5 Aug 22 - Aug 30
Zone 6 Surprise Valley General Methods Buck 10 Aug 22 - Aug 30
season, or junior hunt season license tag may take 
pronghorn antelope using legal firearms and ar-
chery equipment as described in sections 353 and 
354 of these regulations. 
(5) Any person taking any pronghorn antelope shall re-
tain that portion of the head, which bears the horns 
during the open season and for 15 days thereafter, 
and shall produce it upon the demand of any of-
ficer authorized to enforce the provisions of these 
regulations. 
(6) No person shall at any time capture or destroy any 
pronghorn antelope and detach or remove from 
the carcass only the head, hide or horns; nor shall 
any person at any time leave through carelessness 
or neglect any pronghorn antelope which is in his 
their possession or any portion of the flesh thereof 
usually eaten by humans, to go needlessly to waste. 
(7) Prior to the acceptance or issuance of a pronghorn 
antelope license tag, all tagholders shall consent in 
writing to the terms and conditions set forth on the 
license tag. 
2026 Pronghorn Antelope Hunts
=== page 95 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
95
BIGHORN SHEEP HUNT ZONES
Bighorn Sheep Hunt Zones
=== page 96 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
96
BIGHORN SHEEP HUNTING
Bighorn Sheep (T14 CCR 362)
(1) Zone 1 (Marble/Clipper Mountains)
(A) Area: In that portion of San Bernardino County 
beginning at the intersection of Kelbaker Road and 
the National Trails Highway; north on Kelbaker Road 
to the junction with Interstate Highway 40; east on 
Interstate Highway 40 to the intersection with National 
Trails Highway; southwest on National Trails Highway to 
junction with Kelbaker Road. 
(2) Zone 2 (Kelso Peak and Old Dad 
Mountains)
(A) Area: In that That portion of San Bernardino County 
beginning at the intersection of Kelbaker Road and 
the Union Pacific Railroad in Kelso; southwest along the 
Union Pacific Railroad to intersection with unnamed road 
at Crucero; north on unnamed road to the merging with 
Mojave Road; northeast on Mojave Road to the junction 
with Zzyzx Road; north on Zzyzx Road to intersection with 
Interstate Highway 15; northeast on Interstate Highway 
15 to the intersection with Cima Road; south on Cima 
Road to the intersection with the Union Pacific Railroad 
in Cima; southwest on the Union Pacific Railroad to the 
intersection with Kelbaker Road in Kelso. 
(3) Zone 3 (Clark and Kingston Mountain 
Ranges)
(A) Area: In that portion of San Bernardino and Inyo 
counties beginning at the intersection of Interstate 
Highway 15 and California State Highway 127 in Baker; 
north on California State Highway 127 to the junction with 
Old Spanish Gentry Road at Tecopa; southeast on Old 
Spanish Gentry Road to the junction with Furnace Creek 
Road; southeast on Furnace Creek Road to the junction 
with Mesquite Valley Road; north on Mesquite Valley 
Road to Old Spanish Trail Highway; north and east on 
Old Spanish Trail Highway to the California-Nevada state 
line; southeast along the California-Nevada state line to 
the intersection with Interstate Highway 15; southwest on 
Interstate Highway 15 to the junction with California State 
Highway 127. 
(4) Zone 4 (Orocopia Mountains)
(A) Area: In that portion of Riverside County beginning 
at the intersection of Interstate Highway 10 and 
Cottonwood Springs Road; east on Interstate Highway 10 
to the junction with Red Cloud Mine Road; south on Red 
Cloud Mine Road to the junction with the Eagle Mountain 
Mining Railroad; southwest on the Eagle Mountain 
Mining Railroad to the junction with the Bradshaw Trail; 
southwest on the Bradshaw Trail to the Intersection with 
the Coachella Canal; west along the Coachella Canal 
to the junction with Box Canyon Road; northeast on 
Box Canyon Road to the junction with Cottonwood 
Springs Road; north on Cottonwood Springs Road to the 
intersection with Interstate Highway 10. 
(5) Zone 5 (San Gorgonio Wilderness)
(A) Area: In that portion of Riverside and San Bernardino 
counties beginning at the intersection of Interstate 
Highway 10 and California State Highway 62, west on 
Interstate Highway 10 to the junction with California 
State Highway 30; north on California State Highway 30 
to the junction with California State Highway 38; east and 
north on California State Highway 38 to the junction with 
Forest Service Route 1N01; east on Forest Service Route 
1N01 to its joining with Pipes Road; east on Pipes Road 
to the junction with Pioneertown Road; southeast on 
Pioneertown Road to the junction with California State 
Highway 62; southwest on California State Highway 62 to 
the intersection with Interstate Highway 10. 
(6) Zone 6 (Sheep Hole Mountains)
(A) Area: In that portion of San Bernardino County within 
a line, excluding any area within 1km of the Twentynine 
Palms Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center, 
beginning at the intersection of California State Highway 
62 and Ironage Road; northwest on Ironage Road to the 
intersection with Amboy Road; west on Amboy Road 
to the intersection of Naborly Road; north on Naborly 
Road to the intersection of Pole Line Road; west on Pole 
Line Road to the intersection of Shelton Road; north on 
Shelton Road to the junction of the southern boundary of 
Cleghorn Lakes Wilderness Area; west along the southern 
boundary of Cleghorn Lakes Wilderness Area to the 
western boundary of Cleghorn Lakes Wilderness Area; 
north along the western boundary of Cleghorn Lakes 
Wilderness Area to the northern boundary of Cleghorn 
Lakes Wilderness Area; east along the northern boundary 
of Cleghorn Lakes Wilderness Area to the junction of 
Amboy Road; south on Amboy Road to the intersection 
of BLM NS443; northeast on BLM NS443 to the intersection 
of BLM NS458; southeast on BLM NS458 to the intersection 
of California State Highway 62; west on California State 
Highway 62 to the point of beginning.
(7) Zone 7 (White Mountains)
(A) Area: In that portion of Mono County within a 
line beginning at U.S. Highway 6 and the Mono-Inyo 
county line; northward on Highway 6 to the California-
NevadaState Line state line; southeasterly along the 
California-Nevada state line to the Mono-Inyo county 
line; westward along the Mono-Inyo county line to the 
point of beginning. 
(8) Zone 8 (South Bristol Mountains)
(A) Area: In that portion of San Bernardino County 
beginning at the junction of Kelbaker Road and the 
National Trails Highway; west on the National Trails 
Highway to the intersection with Interstate Highway 
BIGHORN SHEEP HUNTING
Bighorn Sheep Hunting
=== page 97 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
97
(13) Zone 13 (Castle Mountains and Paiute 
Range)
(A) Area: In the portion of San Bernardino County begin-
ning at the junction of Nipton Road and Ivanpah Road; 
south on Ivanpah Road and continuing when it becomes 
Lanfair Road to the junction of Lanfair Road and County 
Route 66; east on County Route 66 to the junction with 
U.S. Route 95; north on U.S. Route 95 to the California-
Nevada border; northwest on the California- Nevada 
border to the junction with Castle Mountains National 
Monument boundary; following the Castle Mountains 
National Monument boundary south then west then 
north back to the California-Nevada border; northwest 
on the California-Nevada border to the junction with 
Nipton Road; west on Nipton Road to the point at the 
beginning.
(b) Seasons: 
(1) Open Zone Fundraising Tag: 
The holder of the fundraising license tag issued pursuant 
to subdivision 4902(d) of the Fish and Game Code may 
hunt in Zones with at least one general public tag: 
(A) Zones 1 through 4, 6, and 8 through 13: Beginning 
the first Saturday in November and extending 
through the first Sunday in February. 
(B) Zone 5: Beginning the third Saturday in November 
and extending through the third Sunday in February. 
(C) Zone 7: Beginning the first Saturday in August and 
extending through the last Sunday in September. 
Beginning, again, the third Saturday in December 
and extending through the first Sunday in February. 
(2) Single Zone Fundraising Tag 1: 
Based on the tag issued, the holder of the fundraising li -
cense tag issued pursuant to subdivision 4902(d) of the 
Fish and Game Code may hunt: 
(A) Zones 1 through 4, 6, and 8 through 13: Beginning 
the first Saturday in November and extending 
through the first Sunday in February. 
(B) Zone 5: Beginning the first Saturday in November and 
extending through the third Sunday in February.
(C) Zone 7: Beginning the third Saturday in August and 
extending through the third Sunday in February.
(3) Single Zone Fundraising Tag 2: 
Based on the zone issued, the holder of the fundraising li-
cense tag issued pursuant to subdivision 4902(d) of the Fish 
and Game Code may hunt: 
(A) Zones 1 through 4, 6, and 8 through 13: Beginning 
the first Saturday in November and extending 
through the first Sunday in February. 
(B) Zone 5: Beginning the first Saturday in November and 
BIGHORN SHEEP HUNTING
40; east on Interstate Highway 40 to the junction with 
Kelbaker Road; south on Kelbaker Road to the point of 
beginning. 
(9) Zone 9 (Cady Mountains)
(A) Area: In that portion of San Bernardino County 
beginning at the junction of Interstate Highway 40 and 
Newberry Road; north on Newberry Road to intersection 
with Riverside Road; Easteast on Riverside Road to 
junction with Harvard Road; north on Harvard Road 
to junction with Interstate Highway 15; northeast on 
Interstate Highway 15 to junction with Basin Road; south 
on Basin Road to intersection with Union Pacific Railroad; 
east on along Union Pacific Railroad to intersection with 
Crucero Road; south on Crucero Road to intersection 
with Interstate Highway 40; west on Interstate Highway 
40 to the point of beginning. 
(10) Zone 10 (Newberry, Rodman, and Ord 
Mountains)
(A) Area: In that portion of San Bernardino County 
beginning at the junction Interstate 40 and Barstow Road; 
south on Barstow Road to the junction with Northside 
Road; east on Northside Road to the intersection with 
Camp Rock Road; northeast on Camp Rock Road to 
the intersection with Powerline Road; east on Powerline 
Road and continue on to Transmission Line Road to the 
intersection with Interstate 40, west on Interstate 40 to the 
point of the beginning. 
(11) Zone 11 (Granite and North Bristol 
Mountains)
(A) Area: In that portion of San Bernardino County 
beginning at the junction of Interstate Highway 40 and 
Crucero Road; east on Interstate Highway 40 to the 
junction with Kelbaker Road; north on Kelbaker Road to 
Kelso Depot; west on the Union Pacific Cima Subdivision 
Railroad track to the intersection with the South Powerline 
Road; southwest on the South Powerline Road to the 
intersection with Crucero Road; south on Crucero Road 
to the point of the beginning.
(12) Zone 12 (Providence, Woodss, and 
Hackberry Mountains)
(A) Area: In the portion of San Bernardino County 
beginning at the junction of Interstate Highway 40 and 
Kelbaker Road; east on Interstate Highway 40 to the 
junction with County Route 66; northeast on County 
Route 66 to the junction with Lanfair Road; north on 
Lanfair Road to the junction with Cedar Canyon Road; 
west on Cedar Canyon Road to the junction with Kelso 
Cima Road; southwest on Kelso Cima Road to the 
junction with Kelbaker Road; south on Kelbaker Road to 
the point at the beginning.
=== page 98 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
98
2026 BIGHORN SHEEP HUNTS
extending through the third Sunday in February.
(C) Zone 7: Beginning the third Saturday in August and 
extending through the third Sunday in February.
(4) Except as provided in subsections 362(b)(1),(2), 
and (3), the Nelson bighorn sheep season in the areas 
described in subsection 362(a) shall be defined as 
follows: 
(A) Zones 1 through 4, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12, and 13: Beginning 
the first Saturday in December and extend extend-
ing through the first Sunday in February. 
(B) Zone 5: Beginning the third Saturday in December 
and extending through the third Sunday in February. 
(C) Zone 7: 
1. Zone 7 (Period 1): Beginning the third Saturday in 
August and extending through the last Sunday in 
September. 
2. Zone 7 (Period 2): Beginning the first Saturday in 
January and extending through the first Sunday in 
February. 
(D) Zone 10:
1. Zone 10 (Period 1): Beginning the first Saturday in 
December and extending through the first Saturday 
in January.
2. Zone 10 (Period 2): Beginning the first Sunday in 
January and extending through the first Sunday in 
February. 
(5) Except as specifically provided in section 362, the 
take of bighorn sheep is prohibited. 
(c) Bag and possession Limit: 
One mature ram defined as follows: a male Nelson big -
horn sheep ( Ovis canadensis nelsoni 1) having at least 
one horn, the tip of which extends beyond a point in a 
straight line beginning at the front (anterior) edge of the 
horn base, and extending downward through the rear 
(posterior) edge of the visible portion of the eye and con-
tinuing downward through the horn. All reference points 
are based on viewing the ram directly from a 90 degree 
angle from which the head is facing. A diagram showing 
the correct viewing procedure shall be distributed by the 
department to each successful applicant. 
(e) Conditions: 
(1) Nelson bighorn rams shall only be taken between 
one-half hour before sunrise and one-half hour after 
sunset. 
(2) Only methods specified in sections 353 and 354, Title 
14, CCR, for taking bighorn sheep may be used. 
(3) Each tagholder shall possess a spotting telescope 
capable of magnification of 15 power (15X), which is 
not affixed to a rifle, while hunting. 
(4) Successful general tagholders shall present the head 
and edible portion of the carcass of a bighorn ram 
to the department’s checking station within 48 hours 
after killing the animal. All successful tagholders shall 
notify the department’s Bishop office by telephone at 
(760) 872-1171 or (760) 872-1346  within 24 hours of kill-
ing the animal and arrange for the head and carcass 
to be examined. 
(5) All successful bighorn sheep tagholders shall make the 
horns of each ram available to the department to 
be permanently marked in the manner prescribed by 
the department for identification purposes within 48 
hours of killing the animal. The purpose of the perma-
nent marking shall be to identify Nelson bighorn rams 
which were legally taken and which may be trans-
ported and possessed outside the areas described in 
subsection 362(a). 
(6) The department reserves the right to take and use 
any part of the tagholder’s bighorn ram, except the 
horns, for biological analysis as long as no more than 
one pound of edible meat is removed.
Paul K.
=== page 99 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
99
2026 BIGHORN SHEEP HUNTS
General Methods Hunts
Hunt Name 2026 Tag 
Quota 2026 Hunt Dates
Zone 1 Marble/Clipper Mountains 1 Dec 5 - Feb 7
Zone 2 Old Dad/Kelso Peak Mountains 3 Dec 5 - Feb 7
Zone 3 Clark and Kingston Mountain Ranges 4 Dec 5 - Feb 7
Zone 4 Orocopia Mountains 1 Dec 5 - Feb 7
Zone 5 San Gorgonio Mountains 1 Dec 19 - Feb 21
Zone 6 Sheep Hole Mountains 1 Dec 5 - Feb 7
Zone 7 White Mountains Period 1 2 Aug 15 - Sep 27
Zone 7 White Mountains Period 2 1 Jan 2 - Feb 7
Zone 8 South Bristol Mountains 1 Dec 5 - Feb 7
Zone 9 Cady Mountains 2 Dec 5 - Feb 7
Zone 10 Newberry, Rodman, Ord Period 1 4 Dec 5 - Jan 2
Zone 10 Newberry, Rodman, Ord Period 2 4 Jan 3 - Feb 7
Zone 11 Granite and North Bristol Mountains 1 Dec 5 - Feb 7
 Zone 12 Providence, Woods, and Hackberry Mountains 2 Dec 5 - Feb 7
 Zone 13 Castle Mountains and Piute Range 2 Dec 5 - Feb 7
2026 Bighorn Sheep Hunts
=== page 100 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
100
BEAR HUNTING AREA MAP
The proposed hunt zone expansion as displayed in the map below was adopted by the CA Fish and Game Commission 
at its April 2026 meeting and approved by OAL. It is effective 07/01/2026.
Bear Hunt Zones Bear Hunting
=== page 101 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
101
Bear Tags
To hunt bears in California, all residents and nonresidents 
must be age 12 or older and have both a valid hunting li-
cense and a bear tag. Bear tags can be purchased from 
any CDFW license sales office, license agent, online, or 
by telephone sales. Hunters may purchase only one bear 
tag per hunting license year.
Bear Tags (FGC §4753)
The person to whom a bear tag has been issued shall 
carry the tag while hunting bear. Upon the killing of any 
bear, that person shall immediately fill out the tag com -
pletely, legibly, and permanently, and cut out or punch 
out and completely remove notches or punch holes for 
the month and the date of the kill. One part of the tag 
shall be immediately attached to the ear of the bear and 
kept attached during the open season and for 15 days 
thereafter. The holder of the bear tag shall immediately, 
upon harvesting a bear, notify the department in a man-
ner specified by the commission. Except as otherwise 
provided by this code or regulations adopted pursuant 
to this code, it is unlawful to possess any untagged bear.
Bag and Possession Limits
The daily bag limit is one legal bear per day. The 
possession limit is twice the daily bag limit. 
Definitions
Bear cub
A bear less than one year old or weighing less than 50 lbs. 
T14 CCR §365(c)(1).
Bait Related to Bears
Any material capable of attracting a bear. T14 CCR 
§365(e).
Baited Area
Any area where shelled, shucked or unshucked corn, 
wheat or other grains, salt, or other feed whatsoever ca-
pable of luring, attracting, or enticing such birds or mam-
mals is directly or indirectly placed, exposed, deposited, 
distributed, or scattered, and such area shall remain a 
baited area for ten days following complete removal of 
all such corn, wheat or other grains, salt, or other feed. 
T14 CCR §257.5. 
Use of Dogs for Pursuit/Take
Effective January 1, 2013, the use of dogs to pursue/take 
bears is unlawful for sport-hunting purposes.
Bear Hunting Seasons
Archery bear season in all bear zones opens August 15, 
BEAR HUNTING
2026, and runs through September 6, 2026. 
The general season for black bears opens with the gen -
eral deer hunting seasons in deer zones A, B, C, D, X8, 
X9A, X9B, X10 and X12 and extends through December 
27, 2026. In the remaining deer X zones, the season opens 
October 10, 2026, and extends through December 27, 
2026. CDFW shall close the season earlier if 1,700 bears 
have been reported taken. For daily updates on re -
ported bear harvest, visit our website: wildlife.ca.gov/
Hunting/Bear or call toll-free (888) 277-6398.
Bear (T14 CCR §365)
Except as provided in Section 366, bear may be taken 
only as follows:
(a) Areas:
(1) Northern California: In the counties of Del Norte, 
Humboldt, Lassen, Modoc, Plumas, Shasta, Siskiyou, 
Tehama and Trinity. 
(2) Central California: In the counties of Alpine, Amador, 
Butte, Calaveras, Colusa, El Dorado, Glenn, Lake, 
Mendocino, Nevada, Placer, Sacramento, Sierra, 
Sutter, Yolo and Yuba and those portions of Napa 
and Sonoma counties northeast of Highway 128.
(3) Southern Sierra: That portion of Kern County west of 
Highway 14 and east of the following line: Beginning 
at the intersection of Highway 99 and the Kern-
Tulare county line; south on Highway 99 to Highway 
166; west and south on Highway 166 to the Kern-
Santa Barbara county line; and those portions of 
Fresno, Madera, Mariposa, Merced, Stanislaus, 
Tulare and Tuolumne counties east of Highway 99.
(4) Southern California: In the counties of Los Angeles, 
Santa Barbara and Ventura; that portion of Riverside 
County north of Interstate 10 and west of Highway 
62; and that portion of San Bernardino County south 
and west of the following line: Beginning at the 
intersection of Highway 18 and the Los Angeles-San 
Bernardino county line; east along Highway 18 to 
Highway 247; southeast on Highway 247 to Highway 
62; southwest along Highway 62 to the Riverside-San 
Bernardino county line.
(5) Southeastern Sierra: Those portions of Inyo and Mono 
counties west of Highway 395; and that portion of 
Madera County within the following line: Beginning 
at the junction of the Fresno-Madera-Mono county 
lines; north and west along the Madera-Mono 
county line to the boundary of the Inyo-Sierra 
National Forest; south along the Inyo-Sierra National 
Forest boundary to the Fresno-Madera county 
line; north and east on the Fresno-Madera county 
line to the point of beginning. Also, that portion of 
Inyo county west of Highway 395; and that portion 
of Mono county beginning at the intersection of 
Bear Hunting
=== page 102 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
102
Highway 6 and the Mono county line; north along 
Highway 6 to the Nevada state line; north along 
the Nevada state line to the Alpine county line; 
south along the Mono-Alpine county line to the 
Mono-Tuolumne county line and the Inyo National 
Forest Boundary; south along the Inyo National 
Forest Boundary to the Inyo-Sierra Forest boundary; 
south along the Inyo-Sierra Forest boundary to the 
Fresno-Madera county line; north and east along 
the Fresno-Madera county line to the junction of the 
Fresno-Madera-Mono county line; south along the 
Mono-Fresno county line to the Mono-Inyo County 
line; east along the Mono-Inyo county line to the 
point of beginning.
(b) Seasons
Except in the deer hunt areas designated as zones X-1 
through X-7b in subsection 360(b), the bear season shall 
open on the opening day of the general deer season as 
described in subsections 360(a) and (b) and extend until 
the last Sunday in December in the areas described in 
subsections 365(a)(1), (2), (3) (4) and (5) above. In those 
areas designated as deer hunting zones X-1 through 
X-7b, the bear season shall open on the second Saturday 
in October and extend for 79 consecutive days. The 
bear season shall be closed when the department 
determines that 1,700 bears have been taken pursuant 
to the reporting requirement in subsection 708.12(d). The 
department shall notify the commission, the public via 
the news media and bear tag holders via the U.S. mail 
and the news media when implementing this closure.
(c) Daily Bag and Possession Limits
The daily bag limit is one legal bear per day. The 
possession limit is twice the daily bag limit.)
(c)(1) A legal bear is any bear, with the exception of cubs 
and females accompanied by cubs. Cubs are defined 
as bears less than one year of age or bears weighing less 
than 50 pounds.
(c)(2) Possession of more than one bear gall bladder 
is prima facie evidence that bear gall bladders are 
possessed for sale, as specified in subdivision (b) of Fish 
and Game Code Section 4758.
(d) No open season for bear in the balance of 
the state not included in subsection (a) above.
(e) Bait
No feed, bait or other materials capable of attracting a 
bear shall be placed or used for the purpose of taking or 
pursuing a bear. No bear shall be taken over such bait. 
No person may take a bear within a 400-yard radius of a 
garbage dump or bait.
Archery Bear Hunting (T14 CCR §366)
Bear may be taken with bow and arrow during the bear 
season as specified in Section 365 and as follows:
(a) Areas
Those portions of the state as described in subsection 
365(a).
(b) Season
The archery bear season shall open on the third Saturday 
in August and extend for 23 consecutive days. There is no 
open season for taking bear with bow and arrow in the 
balance of the state.
(c) Daily Bag and Possession Limits
The daily bag limit is one legal bear per day. The 
possession limit is twice the daily bag limit.
(c)(1) A legal bear is any bear, with the exception of cubs 
and females accompanied by cubs. Cubs are defined 
as bears less than one year of age or bears weighing less 
than 50 pounds.
(c)(2) Possession of more than one bear gall bladder 
is prima facie evidence that bear gall bladders are 
possessed for sale, as specified in subdivision (b) of Fish 
and Game Code Section 4758.
(d) The use of dogs is prohibited during the 
archery season for bear.
(e) Bait
No feed, bait or other materials capable of attracting a 
bear to a feeding area shall be placed or used for the 
purpose of taking or pursuing a bear. No bear shall be 
taken over such bait. No person may take a bear within 
a 400 yard radius of a garbage dump or bait.
Presentation of Bear Skull (T14 CCR 
§367.5)
Any person who takes a bear shall present the skull (even 
if damaged) to a department office/officer within 10 
days of taking the bear. The skull shall become property 
of the department. That portion of the skull not needed 
for scientific purposes shall be returned.
Bear Tooth Extraction
Premolar tooth collection is critical for CDFW’s bear 
population monitoring and provides essential age-
at-harvest data necessary to conserve and manage 
bears in California. A premolar tooth is required to be 
extracted from EVERY bear taken during the hunting 
season. IMPORTANT! Place a stick or other object in 
the bear’s jaws so that the mouth remains open. Do 
not present frozen skulls to have the premolar tooth 
removed. Premolars break easily when the skull is frozen, 
BEAR HUNTING
=== page 103 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
103
and become unusable for population monitoring when 
broken,
For additional information, please see the Bear Hunting 
Flyer.
GPS Collars
The CDFW Black Bear Program is deploying GPS collars on 
black bears to collect data to inform their conservation 
and management across the state. When you harvest a 
black bear, there is a chance it may have a GPS collar 
around its neck. If this is the case, please remove the 
collar. When removing the collar, do not cut through its 
belting as this damages the wiring within the collar and 
renders the collar unusable. Instead, use a tool such as a 
5/16” nut driver to loosen the nuts and detach the collar’s 
double bolt and plating with CDFW contact information 
from the collar’s battery pack housing at the bottom. 
You can then remove the collar from the harvested bear.
Bear Tagging and Reporting 
Requirements (FGC §4753)
The person to whom a bear tag has been issued shall 
carry the tag while hunting bear. Upon the killing of 
any bear, that person shall immediately fill out the tag 
completely, legibly, and permanently, and cut out or 
punch out and completely remove notches or punch 
holes for the month and the date of the kill. One part 
of the tag shall be immediately attached to the ear of 
the bear and kept attached during the open season 
and for 15 days thereafter. The holder of the bear tag 
shall immediately, upon harvesting a bear, notify the 
Department in a manner specified by the Commission. 
Except as otherwise provided by this code or regulations 
adopted pursuant to this code, it is unlawful to possess 
any untagged bear.
Whether or not you are successful, all bear tags must 
be reported no later than February 1, 2027. If you fail to 
report your 2026 bear tag, even if you did not kill a bear, 
you will be in violation of (T14 CCR §708.12(d)).
Please call ahead before bringing your harvested bear 
to a CDFW office.
Bear Tag Validation
If you kill a bear, you must have the tag countersigned 
(validated) by a CDFW employee. Bear tags must be 
validated prior to transporting the bear, except for 
the purpose of taking the bear to the nearest person 
authorized to validate the tag en route to your home 
from the point where the bear was taken. Most CDFW 
offices will validate bear tags. 
Only CDFW employees may validate bear tags. Bear tags 
must be validated before the bear can be transported 
BEAR HUNTING
except for the purpose of taking it directly to the nearest 
person authorized to validate the tag. If Department 
offices are closed, the bear tag shall be validated within 
one (1) business day of transporting the bear from the 
point where taken.
Every licensed bear hunter who takes a bear must 
immediately return the validated report card portion 
of the bear tag. The tag may be presented to a CDFW 
office/officer, returned via mail, or reported online at 
wildlife.ca.gov/tagreporting. 
Any bear hunter who utilizes the services of a guide must 
verify that the guide has a valid guide’s license and 
must write the guide’s license number on the bear tag 
in the space provided.Every licensed bear hunter who is 
unsuccessful in taking bear must report their bear tag by 
February 1 of the current license year. The tag may be 
presented to a CDFW office/officer, returned via mail, or 
reported online at wildlife.ca.gov/tagreporting.
It is illegal to sell parts of any bear in California, including 
portions of legally-taken bears imported from other states. 
However, you have the right to retain any and all parts of 
the bear you take, except the skull, which becomes the 
property of CDFW.
CDFW
=== page 104 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
104
RESIDENT SMALL GAME
Resident Small Game Defined (T14 CCR 
§257)
“Resident small game” means the following resident 
game birds: Chinese spotted doves, Eurasian collared-
doves, ringed turtle-doves of the family Columbidae, 
California quail and varieties thereof, Gambel’s or desert 
quail, mountain quail and varieties thereof, sooty grouse 
and varieties thereof, ruffed grouse, sage grouse (sage 
hens), white-tailed ptarmigan, Hungarian partridges, 
red-legged partridges, including the chukar and oth -
er varieties, ring-necked pheasants and varieties, and 
wild turkeys of the order Galliformes; and the following 
game mammals: jackrabbits and varying hares (genus 
Lepus), cottontail rabbits, brush rabbits, pigmy rabbits 
(genus Sylvilagus), and tree squirrels (genus Sciurus and 
Tamiasciurus).
Tree Squirrels (T14 CCR §307)
Tree squirrels may be taken only as follows:
(a) General Season and Areas: The general season in 
the counties of Alameda, Alpine, Amador, Butte, 
Calaveras, Colusa, Contra Costa, Del Norte, El 
Dorado, Fresno, Glenn, Humboldt, Kings, Lake, 
Lassen, Madera, Marin, Mariposa, Mendocino, 
Merced, Modoc, Monterey, Napa, Nevada, Placer, 
Plumas, Sacramento, San Benito, San Luis Obispo, 
San Joaquin, San Mateo, Santa Clara, Santa Cruz, 
Tree Squirrel Hunt Zones
 Hunting Zone
 “No Open Season” Zone
Shasta, Sierra, Siskiyou, Solano, Sonoma, Stanislaus, 
Sutter, Tehama, Trinity, Tulare, Tuolumne, Yolo, 
Yuba, and that portion of Kern County lying east 
of Interstate 5 shall open on the second Saturday 
in September extending through the last Sunday in 
January.
(b) Archery and Falconry Tree Squirrel Season and 
Area: Tree squirrels may be taken with bow and ar -
row or raptors only during the general tree squirrel 
season and as follows:(1) The season in the coun -
ties of Alpine, Amador, Butte, Calaveras, Del Norte, 
El Dorado, Fresno, Glenn, Humboldt, Lake, Lassen, 
Madera, Marin, Mariposa, Modoc, Napa, Nevada, 
Placer, Plumas, Shasta, Sierra, Siskiyou, Solano, 
Sonoma, Sutter, Tehama, Trinity, Tulare, Tuolumne, 
and Yuba; and that portion of Kern County lying 
east of Interstate 5 shall open on the first Saturday 
in August extending through the day before the 
general tree squirrel season.
(c) Bag and Possession Limit: Four squirrels per day, four 
in possession.
(d) Except as provided herein, tree squirrels may not be 
taken at any time in the balance of the state..
Brush, Cottontail and Pigmy Rabbits, 
and Varying Hare (Snowshoe) (T14 CCR 
§308)
(a) General Season and Area: The general season shall 
open on July 1 extending through the last Sunday 
in January, and shall be open statewide except for 
that area described in (d) below.
(b) Falconry Rabbits and Hares: Brush, cottontail and 
pigmy rabbits and varying hare (snowshoe) may 
be taken with raptors only during the general rabbit 
and hare seasons and as follows: The season shall 
open on the first Monday following the close of the 
general season extending through the third Sunday 
in March, and shall be open statewide except for 
that area described in (d) below.
(c) Bag and Possession Limit in the Aggregate of All 
Species: Five per day, 10 in possession.
(d) The take of brush and cottontail rabbits is prohibited 
within the area described as follows: That portion 
of San Joaquin County generally located between 
Stockton and Tracy that is enclosed by the following 
lines: Beginning at the intersection of Stewart Road 
and Interstate 5; west along Stewart road to the in-
tersection of Stewart Road and Old River; southwest 
along Old River to the intersection of Old River and 
Tom Paine Slough; south along Tom Paine Slough to 
the intersection of Tom Paine Slough and Sugar Cut; 
south along Sugar Cut to the intersection of Sugar 
Cut and Interstate 205; east along Interstate 205 
Resident Small Game
=== page 105 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
105
used for taking rabbits and squirrels only; except in 
Los Angeles County where rifles and pistols may not 
be used.
(h) In San Diego and Orange counties only, rabbits may 
be taken at any time during the open season by 
means of box traps. Such traps shall not exceed 24 
inches in any dimension, shall be tended at least 
once every 24 hours, and shall show the name and 
address of the trap owner. All rabbits taken under 
this section shall be immediately killed and become 
a part of the daily bag limit.
(i) Electronic or mechanically-operated calling or 
sound-reproducing devices are prohibited when at-
tempting to take resident game birds.
(j) Coursing dogs may be used to take rabbits.
(k) Archers hunting during any archery season may not 
use or possess a firearm while in the field engaged in 
archery hunting during an archery season except as 
provided in subsection (k)(1).
(1) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the lawful posses-
sion of a concealed firearm by an active peace of-
ficer listed in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 
830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code or a retired 
peace officer in lawful possession of an identifi-
cation certificate issued pursuant to Penal Code 
Section 25455 authorizing the retired officer to carry 
a concealed firearm. Nor shall this section prohibit 
the lawful possession of a concealed firearm pursu-
ant to a concealed carry permit issued pursuant to 
Penal Code sections 26150 or 26155.
(l) The use of live decoys is prohibited when attempting 
to take resident game birds.
(m) Pistols and revolvers may be used to take sooty and 
ruffed grouse in those counties only and for the sea-
son described in Section 300(a)(1)(E).
(n) Crossbows, except for provisions of Section 354(d) 
and (g).
(o) Dogs may be used to take and retrieve resident 
small game.
to the intersection of Interstate 205 and Interstate 
5; north along Interstate 5 to the intersection of 
Interstate 5 and Stewart Road.
Jack Rabbits, Black-Tailed and White-
Tailed (T14 CCR §309)
(a) General Season and Area: The general season shall 
be open statewide all year.
(b) Bag and Possession Limit: No limit.
Shooting Hours on Resident Small Game 
Mammals (T14 CCR §310)
The shooting hours for all resident small game mammals 
shall be one-half hour before sunrise to one-half hour af -
ter sunset.
Methods Authorized for Taking Resident 
Small Game (T14 CCR §311)
The take or attempted take of any resident small game 
with a firearm shall be in accordance with the use of 
nonlead projectiles and ammunition pursuant to Section 
250.1. Only the following may be used to take resident 
small game:
(a) Shotguns 10 gauge or smaller using shot shells only 
and incapable of holding more than three shells in 
the magazine and chamber combined. If a plug is 
used to reduce the capacity of a magazine to fulfill 
the requirements of this section, the plug must be of 
one piece construction incapable of removal with-
out disassembling the gun.
(b) Shotgun shells may not be used or possessed that 
contain shot size larger than No. BB, except that shot 
size larger than No. 2 may not be used or possessed 
when taking wild turkey. All shot shall be loose in the 
shell.
(c) Muzzle-loading shotguns.
(d) Falconry.
(e) Bow and arrow (see Section 354 for archery equip-
ment regulations).
(1) It shall be unlawful to take wild turkey by use of hunt-
ing arrows and crossbow bolts unless fitted with a 
broad head type blade which will not pass through 
a hole seven-eighths inch in diameter. Mechanical/
retractable broad heads shalt be measured in the 
open position.
(f) Air rifles powered by compressed air or gas and used 
with any caliber of pellet, except that wild turkey 
may only be taken with a pellet that is at least 0.177 
caliber.
(g) In addition to the methods listed in (a), (b), (c), (d), 
(e), and (f) above, firearm rifles and pistols may be 
RESIDENT SMALL GAME
=== page 106 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
106
WILD PIG HUNTING/EXOTIC GAME MAMMALS
Exotic Game Mammal Defined (T14 
CCR §375)
“Exotic game mammal” is a mammal, nonnative to 
California, seen to be detrimental to the ecology and 
conservation of native species and their habitats. The an-
imals in this category include the following: wild pig, feral 
pigs, European wild pigs, and their hybrids (genus Sus).
Shooting Hours for Exotic Game 
Mammals (T14 CCR §376)
Shooting hours for exotic game mammals are one half 
hour before sunrise to one half hour after sunset.
Methods Authorized for Taking Exotic 
Game Mammals (T14 CCR §377)
(a) It shall be unlawful to take or attempt to take exotic 
game mammals in violation of this section or Section 
250.1. The take or attempted take of any exotic 
game mammals (as defined by Section 375 of these 
regulations) with a firearm shall be in accordance 
with the use of nonlead projectiles and ammunition 
pursuant to Section 250.1 of these regulations. 
(b) Definition. For purposes of this section, a projectile is 
any bullet, ball, sabot, slug, buckshot or other de-
vice which is expelled from a firearm through a bar-
rel by force. The following definitions shall apply: 
(1) A softnose or expanding projectile is a bullet de-
signed to increase from its original diameter, com-
monly referred to as “mushrooming”, and retain a 
significant part of its original weight upon impact 
with, or when passing through the tissues of an 
animal. 
(2) Projectiles commonly referred to as “frangible” bul-
lets, designed to disintegrate upon impact with, or 
when passing through the tissues of an animal are 
not softnose or expanding projectiles. 
(c) Except for the provisions of the following subsections 
(d) through (j), exotic game may only be taken by 
rifles using centerfire cartridges with softnose or ex-
panding projectiles; bow and arrow (see Section 354 
of these regulations for archery equipment regula-
tions); or wheellock, matchlock, flintlock or percus-
sion type, including “in-line” muzzleloading rifles 
using black powder or equivalent black powder 
substitute, including pellets, with a single projectile 
loaded from the muzzle and at least .40 caliber in 
designation. 
(d) Shotguns capable of holding not more than three 
shells firing single slugs may be used for the tak-
ing of exotic game mammals. In areas where the 
discharge of rifles or shotguns with slugs is prohibited 
by county ordinance, shotguns capable of holding 
not more than three shells firing size 0 or 00 buckshot 
may be used. 
(e) Pistols and revolvers using centerfire cartridges with 
softnose or expanding projectiles may be used to 
take exotic game mammals. 
(f) Except as provided in subsection 354(j) of these regu-
lations, crossbows may not be used to take exotic 
game mammals in an area where an archery sea-
son is open for deer, elk, or pronghorn antelope. 
(g) Except as otherwise provided, while taking or at-
tempting to take exotic game under the provisions 
of this section or Section 354 of these regulations it 
is unlawful to use any device or devices which: 1) 
throw, cast or project an artificial light or electroni-
cally alter or intensify a light source for the purpose 
of visibly enhancing an animal; or 2) throw, cast or 
project an artificial light or electronically alter or 
intensify a light source for the purpose of providing 
a visible point of aim directly on an animal. Devices 
commonly referred to as “sniperscopes,” night vision 
scopes or binoculars, or those utilizing infrared, heat 
sensing or other non-visible spectrum light technol-
ogy used for the purpose of visibly enhancing an 
animal or providing a visible point of aim directly on 
an animal are prohibited and may not be possessed 
while taking or attempting to take exotic game 
mammals. Devices commonly referred to as laser 
rangefinders, “red-dot” scopes with self-illuminating 
reticles, and fiberoptic sights with self-illuminating 
sight or pins which do not throw, cast or project a 
visible light onto an animal are permitted. 
(h) Unless provided in these regulations or any other 
law, it is unlawful to possess a loaded muzzleloading 
firearm in any vehicle or conveyance or its attach-
ments which is standing on or along or is being driv-
en on or along any public road or highway or other 
way open to the public. For the purposes of this 
section, a muzzleloading firearm shall be deemed 
to be loaded when it is capped or primed or has an 
electronic or other ignition device attached and has 
a powder charge and projectile or shot in the barrel 
or cylinder. 
Wild Pig (T14 CCR §378)
Wild pigs may be taken only as follows: 
(a) General Season: Open all year. 
(b) Bag and Possession Limit: There is no daily bag or 
possession limit for wild pigs. 
Prohibition Against Feeding Exotic 
Game Mammals (T14 CCR §379)
No person shall knowingly feed exotic game mammals, 
as defined section 375 of these regulations unless autho-
rized by a depredation permit issued by the department.
Wild Pig Hunting/Exotic Game Mammals
=== page 107 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
107
Pig Validations (FGC §4657)
(a) The holder of a wild pig validation shall keep the 
validation in their possession while hunting wild pig.
(b) (1) The commission shall adopt regulations govern-
ing the transportation of a wild pig carcass and the 
reporting of any take of a wild pig.
(2) The regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall 
provide for reporting of any take of a wild pig elec-
tronically, and shall require the following information:
(A) The identity of the person taking the wild pig.
(B) The date and location of the taking of the wild pig.
(C) Any other information the commission finds would 
be appropriate to better understand the location 
and abundance, and rate of take, of wild pigs or to 
enforce the provisions of this code or Title 14 of the 
California Code of Regulations.
Wild Pig Validations (T14 CCR §708.13)
(a) Any person, 12 years of age or older, who possesses 
a valid annual California hunting license may pro-
cure a wild pig validation as specified in Section 
4654 of the Fish and Game Code through the 
department’s Automated License Data System ter-
minals at any department license agent or depart-
ment license sales office. 
(b) Wild pig validations are valid only during that portion 
of the current hunting license year in which wild pigs 
may be legally harvested as provided in subsection 
378(a). 
(c) Any person hunting wild pigs shall carry a wild pig 
validation. Hunters are required to report take in the 
Automated License Data System within 60 days of 
the end of the license year. Reporting information 
shall include the hunter’s identity, and number of 
pigs taken by month and county of take pursuant to 
Fish and Game Code 4657.
Wild Pig Validation
Resident and nonresident hunters, 12 years of age and 
older, with a valid annual or two-day California hunting li-
cense may purchase a wild pig hunting validation. There 
is no limit on the number of wild pigs one person may 
harvest with a validation; fees are nonrefundable and 
cannot be transferred from one person to another. Wild 
pigs no longer need to be tagged; however, the hunter 
is required to have their license and validation on their 
person while with a harvested pig.
Reporting Requirements
Hunters are required to report pig harvest at the end of 
the season in the Automated License and Data System. 
Reporting requirements include the number of pigs har -
vested by month and by county (T14 CCR 708.13). Hunters 
may complete their report at the end of the season by 
logging into Online Sales and Services and navigating to 
“Harvest Reporting”.
Wild Pig Hunting Season
Wild pig validations may be used throughout the hunting 
year, commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30 the 
following year. There is no daily bag or possession limit 
for wild pig (T14 CCR 378). For more information on pig 
hunting and regulations, please go to CDFW’s website at 
wildlife.ca.gov/Hunting/Wild-Pig.
Legal Methods of Take
Generally, wild pigs may only be taken using archery 
equipment, rifles, .40 caliber or greater muzzleloaders, 
shotguns and pistols, or revolvers. Knives and spears 
are not legal methods of take for wild pigs in California. 
Please see the California Hunting Regulations for Methods 
Authorized for Taking Exotic Game Mammals (T14 CCR 
§377) for detailed information.
WILD PIG HUNTING/EXOTIC GAME MAMMALS
Top 15 Counties for Wild Pig Hunting 
COUNTY
3-year average 
reported take
(LY2022-LY2024)
Monterey 671
San Luis Obispo 439
Kern 290
Tehama 206
Mendocino 163
Santa Clara 123
Colusa 110
San Benito 108
Fresno 74
Sonoma 71
Santa Barbara 67
Glenn 66
Napa 66
Alameda 65
Merced 64
=== page 108 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
108
WILD PIG HUNTING/EXOTIC GAME MAMMALS
Wild Pig Hunting Opportunities
Cañada de los Osos Ecological Reserve
CDFW provides limited-permit apprentice pig hunting 
opportunities at Cañada de los Osos Ecological Reserve 
near Gilroy. The hunts are conducted in coordination 
with volunteers from the California Deer Association 
(CDA) who operate the program.
Hunts are scheduled in the spring and fall, and appli -
cants may only apply online by visiting wildlife.ca.gov/
Regions/3/Hunts/CDLO. Due to the high demand, hunt -
ers who are unable to attend the hunt for which they are 
drawn must notify our office within 5 days of being noti -
fied that they were successfully drawn. Please only apply 
for hunt dates you can attend.
Successful applicants will be assigned a volunteer from 
the CDA who will act as their guide for the duration of 
the hunt. Cañada de los Osos falls within the Ridley-Tree 
Condor Preservation Area and non-lead ammunition is 
required for all big game hunts.
Additional information about these hunts and others may 
be obtained by visiting CDFW’s special pig hunts web -
page wildlife.ca.gov/Hunting/Wild-Pig#194443-hunts. 
The CDFW continues to work with resource conservation 
partners to provide these special pig hunts. Additional 
special opportunities will be announced on this web -
page as they become available.
Protect California’s wildlife resources with the
NATURAL RESOURCE  
VOLUNTEER PROGRAM
Building Community Within Our Natural Resources
The mission of the Natural Resource Volunteer Program 
is to provide conservation and enforcement education in 
public service, through community outreach, State lands 
monitoring, habitat and pollution awareness, animal 
welfare and CDFW administrative assistance.
wildlife.ca.gov/Explore/Volunteering/NRVP
Chrissy F.
=== page 109 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
109
NONGAME ANIMALS
General Provisions (T14 CCR §472)
Except as otherwise provided in Sections 478, 485, and 
subsections (a) through (d) below, nongame birds and 
mammals may not be taken.
(a) The following nongame birds and mammals may be 
taken at any time of the year and in any number 
except as prohibited in Chapter 6: English sparrow, 
starling, domestic pigeon (Columba livia) except 
as prohibited in Fish and Game Code section 3680, 
coyote, weasels, skunks, opossum, moles and ro-
dents (excluding tree and flying squirrels, and those 
listed as furbearers, endangered or threatened 
species).
(b) Fallow, sambar, sika, and axis deer, of either sex, 
may be taken concurrently with the general deer 
season and on properties where an authorized deer, 
elk, or pronghorn antelope season is open. There is 
no bag or possession limit for deer taken pursuant to 
this subsection.
(1) It shall be unlawful to take any deer pursuant to this 
subsection without a valid hunting license in posses-
sion, but no tag, stamp, or additional endorsement 
of any kind is required.
(2) It shall be unlawful to detach or remove only the 
head, hide, or antlers of any deer taken pursuant to 
this subsection, or to leave through carelessness or 
neglect any portion of the flesh normally eaten by 
humans to go to waste.
(c) Aoudad, mouflon, tahr, and feral goats may 
be taken all year.(d) American crows (Corvus 
brachyrhynchos)
(1) May be taken only under the provisions of Section 
485 and by landowners or tenants, or by persons 
authorized in writing by such landowners or tenants, 
when American crows are committing or about to 
commit depredations upon ornamental or shade 
trees, agricultural crops, livestock, or wildlife, or 
when concentrated in such numbers and manner 
as to constitute a health hazard or other nuisance. 
Persons authorized by landowners or tenants to take 
American crows shall keep such written authoriza-
tion in their possession when taking, transporting or 
possessing American crows. American crows may 
be taken only on the lands where depredations 
are occurring or where they constitute a health 
hazard or nuisance. If required by Federal regula-
tions, landowners or tenants shall obtain a Federal 
migratory bird depredation permit before taking any 
American crows or authorizing any other person to 
take them.
(2) American crows may be taken under the provisions 
of this subsection only by firearm, bow and arrow, 
falconry or by toxicants by the Department of Food 
and Agriculture for the specific purpose of taking 
depredating crows. Toxicants can be used for taking 
crows only under the supervision of employees or 
officers of the Department of Food and Agriculture 
or federal or county pest control officers or employ-
ees acting in their official capacities and possessing 
a qualified applicator certificate issued pursuant to 
sections 14151-14155 of the Food and Agriculture 
Code. Such toxicants must be applied according 
to their label requirements developed pursuant 
to sections 6151-6301, Title 3, California Code of 
Regulations.
(e) Pursuant to Fish and Game Code Section 2003, it is 
unlawful to offer any prize or other inducement as a 
reward for the taking of nongame mammals in an 
individual contest, tournament, or derby.
Possession of Nongame Animals (T14 
CCR §473)
(a) (a) Any nongame bird or mammal that has been 
legally taken pursuant to this chapter may be 
possessed.
(b) (b) It is unlawful to possess live nutria (Myocastor 
coypus), and the Department shall not issue any 
permit authorizing possession of any live nutria.
Hours for Taking (T14 CCR §474)
Nongame mammals may be taken at any time except 
as provided in this section.
(a) Area Closed to Night Hunting: Nongame mam-
mals may be taken only between one-half hour 
before sunrise and one-half hour after sunset in 
the following described area: Beginning at a point 
where Little Panoche Road crosses Interstate 5 
near Mendota; south on Interstate 5 to Highway 
198; east on Highway 198 to Highway 99; south 
on Highway 99 to Interstate 5; south on Interstate 
5 to the Los Padres National Forest boundary in 
Section 8, T 9 N, R 19 W, S.B.B.M near Fort Tejon 
Historical Monument; west along the National Forest 
boundary to Cerro Noroeste Road; northwest on 
Cerro Noroeste Road to Highway 33-166; north 
on Highway 33-166 to the Soda Lake Road; north-
west on the Soda Lake Road and on the Simmler 
Soda Lake San Diego Creek Road to Highway 58 
at Simmler; west on Highway 58 to the Cammotti 
Shandon Road; north on the Cammotti Shandon 
Road to the Shandon San Juan Road; north on the 
Shandon San Juan Road to Highway 41; northeast 
on Highway 41 to the Cholame Valley Road; north-
west on Cholame Valley Road and Cholame Road 
to the Parkfield Coalinga Road in Parkfield; north 
on Parkfield Coalinga Road and Parkfield Grade 
to Highway 198; northwest on Highway 198 to the 
Nongame Animals
=== page 110 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
110
Fresno-Monterey county line; north along the Fresno-
Monterey county and Fresno-San Benito county lines 
to the Little Panoche Road; north and east on the 
Little Panoche Road to the point of beginning at 
Interstate 5. 
This section does not pertain to the legal take of 
nongame mammals with traps as provided for 
by Sections 461-480 of these regulations, and by 
Sections 4000-4012, 4152 and 4180 of the Fish and 
Game Code. (This regulation supersedes Section 
3000 of the Fish and Game Code.)
(b) On privately-owned property, not included in (a) 
above, nongame mammals may be taken from 
one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before 
sunrise only by the landowner or his agents, or by 
persons who have in their immediate possession 
written permission issued by the landowner or tenant 
that states the permittee can trespass from one-half 
hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise on 
property under the ownership or control of such 
landowners or tenants.
(c) Fallow deer, axis deer, sambar deer, sika deer, aou-
dad, mouflon, tahr and feral goats may be taken 
only from one-half hour before sunrise to one-half 
hour after sunset.
Methods of Take for Nongame Birds and 
Mammals (T14 CCR §475)
Nongame birds and nongame mammals may be taken 
in any manner except as follows:
(a) Poison may not be used.
(b) Recorded or electrically amplified bird or mammal 
calls or sounds or recorded or electrically amplified 
imitations of bird or mammal calls or sounds may 
not be used to take any nongame bird or nongame 
mammal except coyotes, bobcats, American crows 
and starlings.
NONGAME ANIMALS
(c) Fallow deer, sambar deer, axis deer, sika deer, aou-
dad, mouflon, tahr and feral goats may be taken 
only with the equipment and ammunition specified 
in Section 353 of these regulations.
(d) Traps may be used to take nongame birds and non-
game mammal only in accordance with the provi-
sions of Section 465.5 of these regulations and sec-
tions 3003.1 and 4004 of the Fish and Game Code.
(e) No feed, bait or other material capable of attract-
ing a nongame mammal may be placed or used 
in conjunction with dogs for the purpose of taking 
any nongame mammals. Nothing in this section shall 
prohibit an individual operating in accordance with 
the provisions of Section 465.5 from using a dog to 
follow a trap drag and taking the nongame mam-
mal caught in that trap.
(f) The take or attempted take of any nongame bird 
or nongame mammal with a firearm shall be in 
accordance with the use of nonlead projectiles 
and ammunition pursuant to Section 250.1 of these 
regulations.
Hunting, trapping, or otherwise taking 
bobcats unlawful (FGC §4156)
(a) Except as provided in Section 4157 and notwithstand-
ing any other law, it is unlawful for a person to hunt, trap, 
or otherwise take a bobcat.
Get the Most Out of Your Game!
Expert tips to make the most of your harvest:
• Field dress as soon as possible.
• Store meat in camp by hanging in a cool, dry area. Use a 
canvas tarp to cover if necessary (never plastic).
• It’s OK to wash down with clean, cool water. Be sure to let 
it air dry.
• Air drying and keeping the body wiped down will minimize 
blow fly issues. 
• Transport in canvas tarps, placing an unopened block of 
ice in the body cavity to keep it cool. 
• If quartering and packing in an ice chest, prevent the 
meat from soaking in water. 

=== page 111 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
111
Hunting dogs (retriever, pointer, and flushing 
breeds)
• Keep dogs within sight.
• Bring a leash to restrain dogs if wolves or wolf signs 
are encountered.
• Use a whistle and talk loudly to dog(s) and other 
hunters.
When hiking or camping with companion dogs 
in areas occupied by wolves
• Consider leaving dogs at home.
• Do not allow dogs to roam at large. Dogs running 
loose may attract wolves.
• Bring a leash to restrain dogs if wolves or wolf signs 
are encountered.
• Keep dogs on a leash when wolf signs are encoun-
tered or when walking/hiking in known wolf habitat.
• Consider placing a bell on the dog’s collar.
• Do not leave dogs outside overnight unless they are 
kept in a sturdy kennel.
• Do not leave dog food outside at night.
• Avoid letting dogs outside for bathroom breaks after 
dark except in areas with good lighting or fencing.
If you encounter a wolf
• Bring the dogs to heel at your side or put them on 
leash as quickly as possible.
• Pick up small dogs to minimize potential contact.
• Stand between the dogs and the wolf, which often 
ends the encounter.
• Do not attempt to break up a fight between a wolf 
and a dog, which could result in injury to you.
GRAY WOLF IN CALIFORNIA
Gray Wolf Status and Protections
Gray wolves (Canis lupus) are native to California but 
are believed to have been extirpated from the 1920s 
through 2011. With the recent expansion of this large 
carnivore in the western United States, gray wolves are 
recolonizing California. This species is wide ranging and 
as a habitat generalist, can be found in many different 
habitats. Most known gray wolf activity is in the north -
eastern portion of the state (east of I-5 and north of I-80), 
however wolves can be potentially found across the 
majority of the state.
For additional information, please see: https://www. 
wildlife.ca.gov/Conservation/Mammals/Gray-Wolf or 
fws.gov/mountain-prairie/species/mammals/wolf/
To report wolf activity or sightings please contact the 
California Department of Fish and Wildlife (530) 225-2300 
or the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (916) 414-6660 or 
https://www.wildlife.ca.gov/Conservation/Mammals/
Gray-Wolf/Sighting-Report
Gray wolves are listed as an endangered species un -
der both the federal Endangered Species Act and the 
California Endangered Species Act and as such there 
are prohibitions against lethal take and harassment for 
the species.
Methods to Reduce Conflict Between 
Wolves and Hunting Dogs
Wolves and domestic dogs have the potential to 
come into contact with each other in rural or remote 
landscapes where wolves have reestablished or may 
occur. Wolf packs are often highly territorial and pro-
tective around dens, rendezvous sites, and feeding 
locations. Thus, domestic dogs may be attacked by 
wolves defending their territory or pups. Methods to 
avoid wolf and domestic dog conflicts include:
Hunting dogs (hound breeds)
• Avoid releases in areas with fresh evidence of 
wolves.
• Release hounds only on fresh sign of the target 
species to avoid long chases.
• Yell or make noise when releasing hounds and 
going to tree.
• Reach hounds at trees as quickly as possible so 
they are not unattended for long periods.
• Leash dogs at trees to control them.
• Place bells or beeper collars on hounds or hunt-
ing dogs.
Gray Wolf in California
=== page 112 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
112
This page intentionally left blank.
=== page 113 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
113
State of California – Department of Fish and Wildlife 
DECLARATION OF IMPORTATION OF DEAD FISH AND WILDLIFE 
DFW 901 (NEW 01/01/22) 
 You can submit online at wildlife.ca.gov/qr/declaration-form
Form Instructions 
BEFORE COMPLETING: Pursuant to Title 14, Section 712.5, California Code of Regulations (CCR) 
and Fish and Game Code Section 2353, notwithstanding any other provision of law, it is unlawful to 
import (or bring into the state of California) any dead birds, mammals, fish, reptiles, or amphibia legally 
taken and legally possessed from outside of California, unless a declaration is submitted to the 
California Department of Fish and Wildlife (Department) at or immediately prior to the time of entry. The 
importation of live animals is regulated under separate laws and regulations, therefore this form is not 
required for importation of live wildlife. Situations by which this form would be used include dead wildlife 
imported into California from out of state (including out of the country in accordance with that country’s 
export requirements): 
• Legally hunted or fished for personal consumption;
• Legally taken for trophy or taxidermy;
• Legally taken specimens for scientific or other research, notwithstanding other laws for their
possession and/ or importation; and
• Other legal uses.
Section 1 – Original Permitholder Information. For importation of dead wildlife and/or parts thereof,
indicate the Importer’s first name, last name, Government-Issued ID or Driver’s License #, birthdate, 
physical (mailing) address, and optional email address. 
Section 2 – Dead Wildlife and/or Parts Thereof Information. Provide a description of the wildlife 
imported, including species, quantity, sex and antler points when applicable, etc. State or Federal 
permits under which authority the take and/or possession (collection) of the salvaged animals, and/or 
parts thereof occurred. For categories that don't apply, indicate N/A. 
Section 3 – CERTIFICATION The importer signs here certifying under penalty of perjury that the 
information provided is true and correct and that the fish or wildlife described are legally 
possessed/imported by the signer. 
To declare importation of dead fish and wildlife, please print and complete the form on the following page, or 
complete the online form. 
DECLARATION OF IMPORTATION
Declaration of Importation
=== page 114 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
114
State of California – Department of Fish and Wildlife 
DECLARATION OF IMPORTATION OF DEAD FISH AND WILDLIFE 
DFW 901 (NEW 01/01/22) 
 You can submit online at wildlife.ca.gov/qr/declaration-form
Pursuant to Fish and Game Code section 2353 and California Code of Regulations, title 14, section 712.5, this declaration for m shall be 
completed by the person importing dead birds, mammals, fish, reptiles, or amphibians, prior to or upon entry (within 24 hours) into the State 
of California. This declaration form shall be submitted online at wildlife.ca.gov/qr/declaration-form or postmarked to the Department of Fish 
and Wildlife, Law Enforcement Division, PO Box 944209, Sacramento CA 94244-2090. A copy of this completed declaration form, or a 
confirmation number if completed online, shall be retained with the dead fish or wildlife. 
SECTION 1. IMPORTER INFORMATION 
FIRST NAME M.I. LAST NAME 
GOVERNMENT ISSUED ID or DRIVER’S LICENSE NUMBER DATE OF BIRTH PREFERRED TELEPHONE 
PHYSICAL ADDRESS 
CITY STATE ZIP EMAIL ADDRESS (Voluntary) 
IMPORTATION VEHICLE LICENSE # 
SECTION 2. DEAD WILDLIFE, AND/ OR PARTS THEREOF INFORMATION 
Description of Fish or Wildlife
(species, quantity, sex, antler points when 
applicable, etc.) 
Carcass or Part 
typeA 
LOCATION AND DATE OF IMPORTATION 
Out of State 
Hunting Tag # 
Harvest Location 
(County, State, or 
country) 
Out of State 
Fishing or Hunting 
License #, or 
permit # 
SECTION 3. CERTIFICATION 
I certify under penalty of perjury that the information above is true and correct and that the fish or wildlife described above are legally 
possessed/imported by the undersigned. 
Signature Date 
Information regarding Chronic Wasting Disease: The California Code of Regulations, title 14, section 712 governs the importation of 
hunter-harvested deer and elk (cervid) into California. Only some parts of a harvested deer or elk can be imported, and no portions of the 
brain or spinal cord may be imported. For more information go to: 
https://wildlife.ca.gov/Conservation/Laboratories/Wildlife-Health/Monitoring/CWD 
A Carcass or Part Type codes: WC = whole fresh/frozen carcass; MC = meat cuts (processed); MQ = meat cuts (quarter); TS = 
tissue samples; TA = taxidermy/ trophy mount; H = hide; S = scientific specimens; O = other 
SAVE PRINT CLEAR
DECLARATION OF IMPORTATION
=== page 115 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
115
CWD is in California
Chronic wasting disease (CWD) was detected in 
California for the first time in 2024. Check out our website 
and CWD Dashboard at wildlife.ca.gov/CWD for detailed 
information about positive detections and testing 
throughout the state. Working with hunters, landowners, 
meat processors, and taxidermists, CDFW is determining 
where the disease has spread in California and taking 
actions to prevent the further spread of disease.
What is CWD?
CWD is a fatal neurologic disease of cervids (e.g., deer, 
elk, moose, reindeer). It is caused by a misfolded form 
of a normal protein, known as a prion. The misfolded 
proteins build up in tissues, particularly the brain, causing 
progressive damage. 
Find out more on the CWD website: wildlife.ca.gov/CWD.
Most CWD-positive animals do not appear 
to be sick until a year after contracting the 
disease. Only testing can confirm whether an 
animal has CWD.
How does CWD spread?
CWD spreads through direct contact with prions from 
infected individuals or contaminated environments. 
Infectious prions can be excreted in urine, feces, and 
saliva of infected animals before they show any signs of 
the disease. Prions persist in animal carcasses and tissues, 
especially in the brain, spinal cord, and lymph nodes. 
Infected carcasses can contaminate the environment 
and spread the disease if left out on the landscape, as 
prions can persist for ten or more years in soils and be 
taken up by plants
CHRONIC WASTING DISEASE
What is CDFW doing about CDFW?
CWD Management Plan – The Department finalized 
a statewide CWD Surveillance, Response, and 
Management Plan in 2024. CDFW also publishes annual 
surveillance reports.
CWD Management Zones (CMZ) – CMZs can 
have mandatory sampling and carcass handling 
requirements. The CWD website is kept up to date with 
any requirements for hunters: wildlife.ca.gov/CWD.
Free Testing for Hunters – CDFW provides free CWD 
testing of retropharyngeal lymph nodes from deer and 
elk harvested in California.
How to Have Your Deer or Elk Tested for CWD
CDFW tests retropharyngeal lymph nodes (deer and elk 
and obex (elk). 
• Bring the deer or elk, or head with 4-6 inches of neck 
attached, to a CDFW operated sampling station or 
office: wildlife.ca.gov/CWD/Sampling-Station. Call 
to schedule an appointment at a CDFW office.
• Bring the deer or elk, or head with 4-6 inches 
of neck attached, to a participating meat 
processor or taxidermist: wildlife.ca.gov/CWD/
Meat-ProcessorsTaxidermists.
• Collect and submit samples yourself by following 
these instructions: wildlife.ca.gov/CWD/
Collect-Submit-Samples.
How Can Hunters Help?
• Hunters provide approximately 70% of CDFW’s CWD 
samples. 
• Get your harvest tested for free! 
Field process your harvest. Leave the guts, back-
bone, and brains behind to prevent spreading CWD 
to new locations.
• Follow import restrictions. Do not import deer or elk 
brain or spinal cord into California—only bring in 
clean skull plates or completed taxidermy mounts.
CHRONIC WASTING DISEASE
Chronic Wasting Disease
=== page 116 ===
2026-2027 MAMMAL HUNTING
116

