=== page 1 ===
California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System 
 California Department of Fish and Wildlife 
California Interagency Wildlife Task Group 
HIMALAYAN TAHR Hemitragus jemlahicus 
Family: BOVIDAE Order: ARTIODACTYLA Class: MAMMALIA 
M185 
Written by: R. A. Hopkins
Reviewed by: H. Shellhammer
Edited by: J. Harris, S. Granholm 
DISTRIBUTION, ABUNDANCE, AND SEASONALITY 
The tahr is an uncommon, yearlong resident of valley foothill hardwood and open
grassland habitats on the Hearst Ranch, San Luis Obispo Co. (Barrett 1966). Probably no
more than a few hundred of these introduced, goat-like animals live on the ranch. Native to 
Himalayan region, from Kashmir to Sikkim.
SPECIFIC HABITAT REQUIREMENTS 
Feeding: Barrett (1966) suggested that tahr on the Hearst Ranch fed primarily on grasses,
forbs, and to a lesser extent on browse, such as live oak, toyon, poison-oak, and laurel.
Detailed food habits studies are lacking. 
Cover: Rock outcrops and cliffs appear to be almost essential for escape cover and for
bedding. The tahr, which evolved in a cooler climate, may require shaded woodlands and
north-facing slopes in summer. 
Reproduction: Rock outcrops and rugged cliffs offer protection from predators during
breeding. 
Water: No data found. 
Pattern: Tahr use a mixture of valley foothill hardwoods and open grasslands, 
interspersed with rocky outcrops for protection. In native Himalaya habitat, rocky, wooded
mountain slopes and rugged hills are preferred (Nowak and Paradiso 1983). 
SPECIES LIFE HISTORY 
Activity Patterns: Active yearlong; primarily diurnal.
Seasonal Movements/Migration: Non-migratory in areas of moderate topographic relief, 
such as the Hearst Ranch. 
Home Range: Bachelor herds of different sizes and age-classes are found, as well as
composite bands of mature females, immature bulls, and kids (Anderson and Henderson
1961). Native herds contain 2-23 individuals. In New Zealand, densities of 4.5 to 6.8/km² 
(0.4 mi²) were reported among the introduced populations (Nowak and Paradiso 1983).
Territory: No data found. 
Reproduction: The rut in the Himalayas occurs from October through January. In New 
Zealand, it begins in late April and lasts until early June (Anderson and Henderson 1961).
Probably rut in the autumn in California. During the rut, bulls pair with estrous females. 
=== page 2 ===
Parturition is in December in New Zealand; probaby in May or June in California. Females 
become sexually mature at about 2 yr and breed each yr thereafter. 
Niche: This introduced bovid may compete with other exotic ungulates on the Hearst 
Ranch, as well as with livestock and native black-tailed deer. Potential predators include 
mountain lions, which could prey on adults and young, and bobcats and coyotes, which 
probably would prey mostly on young. 
REFERENCES 
Anderson, J. A., and J. B. Henderson. 1961. Himalayan tahr in New Zealand. Symposium 
on animal-forest relationships. Tenth Pac. Sci. Congr., Honolulu, Hawaii. New Zealand 
Deerstalkers Assoc. Special Publ. No. 2. 37pp. 
Barrett, R. H. 1966. History and status of introduced ungulates on Rancho Piedra Blanca, 
California. M.S. Thesis, Univ. Michigan, Ann Arbor. 141pp. 
Nowak, R. M., and J. L. Paradiso. 1983. Walker's mammals of the world. 4th ed. 2 vols. 
John Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore, MD. 1362pp. 
M185 
Life history accounts for species in the California Wildlife Habitat Relationships (CWHR) System were originally published in: 
Zeiner, D.C., W.F.Laudenslayer, Jr., K.E. Mayer, and M. White, eds. 1988-1990. California's Wildlife. Vol. I-III. California Depart. 
of Fish and Game, Sacramento, California. Updates are noted in accounts that have been added or edited since original publication. 
