=== page 1 ===
ANNOUNCEMENT FOR THE 
2025-2026 GAME BIRD HUNTING SEASON 
 
 
The Department of Land and Natural Resources announces the opening of the 2025-2026 Game Bird 
Hunting Season on Saturday, November 1, 2025. The fall game bird hunting season will run through 
Sunday, January 25, 2026. To comply with federal mandates, including the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, 
and to meet current state regulations, the last day for hunting mourning doves will be January 11, 
2026. A valid hunting license and a game bird stamp are required for all game bird hunting on public 
and private lands. To purchase your hunting license or game bird stamp, please go to: 
https://dlnr.hawaii.gov/recreation/hunting/. All game bird hunting is regulated by Hawaiʻi 
Administrative Rules (HAR) Title 13, Chapter 122 (see https://dlnr.hawaii.gov/dofaw/rules/ 
“Administrative Rules” for all legal hunting days). To view this announcement online, please go to 
https://dlnr.hawaii.gov/recreation/hunting/hunting- announcements/. OuterSpatial, DLNR’s Outdoor 
Trail and Hunting mobile application, is available for electronic hunter check-in/out, and harvest 
reporting unless otherwise indicated below. For more details: https://dlnr.hawaii.gov/dofaw/app/. 
Several hunter check stations will be manned by DOFAW staff and manual check-in may be required. 
 
ISLAND OF KAUAʻI 
HUNTING UNITS A, B, E, H, and I on the island of Kauaʻi will be open for the entire 2025- 2026 game 
bird hunting season. Game bird hunting will be permitted on Saturdays, Sundays, Mondays, and 
State Holidays. Hunters planning to hunt in Unit I (Wailua Game Management Area) should review 
the hunting map at either Rice Gate or the Kondo Gate hunter check stations to find out which 
paddocks will be open to bird hunting. Wailua GMA maps are also available at the State Office 
building in Līhuʻe. Hunting of female Pheasants is allowed at Kekaha GMA only (put and take 
system) and will count against the listed “Daily Bag Limit” in HAR Chapter 13-122. 
HUNTING UNIT J will be open to game bird hunting using archery equipment only during the regular 
season on weekends, Mondays, and State holidays. 
 
HUNTING UNIT L will be open during the regular season on Saturdays and Sundays only. For more 
information on this hunting unit, please inquire with the Lihue DOFAW office at 274-3433. 
 
Other PRIVATE LANDS on the island of Kauaʻi are open to game bird hunting on Saturdays, Sundays, 
and State Holidays, with landowner permission in accordance with HAR Chapter 13-122. 
 
ISLAND OF OʻAHU 
 
KUAOKALĀ GMA, KUAOKALA FOREST RESERVE, AND MOKULĒʻIA PHA (UNIT 1) will be open on 
Saturdays, Sundays, and State Holidays from November 1, 2025, through January 25, 2026. The 
Division may offer additional weekday hunting opportunities. Information regarding this 
opportunity will be posted on our hunting announcement webpage. 
https://dlnr.hawaii.gov/recreation/hunting/oahu/  
 
To gain clearance from the Kaʻena Point Satellite Tracking Station Guard Shack, hunters must have: a 
valid Hawai’i hunting license, a valid form of ID, and up-to-date vehicle safety/registration 
information. 
=== page 2 ===
Hunters must check in and out (prior to starting their hunt) using the following: 
- Hunter Check Station for Ranch Section by information/outreach signs (1st Gravel Parking lot) 
- Hunter Check Station for Forest Section (Parking Area before chain link gate leading to fields) 
- DOFAW’s OuterSpatial App 
**The check-in process with KPTS guards is separate from the DOFAW hunter check-in** 
 
Species occurring in this area include ring-necked pheasant (Common, Kansas, Jumbo, Manchurian, 
and Blue variety), Erckel’s francolin, black francolin, gray francolin, chukar partridge, barred dove, 
and spotted dove, with bag limits as listed in HAR Chapter 13-122, Rules Regulating Game Bird 
Hunting. Hunting of female ring-necked pheasants is allowed at Kuaokalā GMA only (put and take 
system) and will count against the listed “Daily Bag Limit” in HAR Chapter 13-122. Public hunters 
should refrain from taking female Ring-Necked Pheasants during the month of January. 
 
Additional Species: Hunting of peafowl (male/ female) is allowed in Kuaokalā, three birds of either 
sex per hunter per day. The Nepal Kalij Pheasant (male/ female) will be counted for “Daily Bag 
Limits” under Ring-neck Pheasant/ Other Pheasant spp. 
 
HUNTING OF WILD TURKEYS IS STILL PROHIBITED in all public and private hunting areas to allow 
the population to reach a level suitable for hunting in the future. 
 
Game Mammal Hunting will be closed during the bird season. 
 
MAKUA KEAʻAU PHA (UNIT 2) will be open on Saturdays, Sundays, and State Holidays from 
November 1, 2025, through January 25, 2026. The Division may offer additional weekday hunting 
opportunities by permit only. More information can be found on the Forestry & Wildlife website 
within the online applications: https://dlnr.hawaii.gov/recreation/hunting/oahu/. 
 
Hunter’s may contact the Makiki Baseyard Front Office – (808-973-9788) during operational hours, 
for the gate combination for the season. Hunters shall park off the Keaʻau Homestead Road just 
before the entrance of Our Lady of Keaʻau; the hunter check station is relocated to this spot.  
Hunter must continue on foot up the homestead road past a rancher’s gate. Hunters are to 
continue up the ranch road into the hunting area on the “flats”. From this point, hunters can walk 
to the desired location to avoid private property boundaries. 
Hunters must check in and out (prior to starting their hunt) using the following: 
- Hunter Check Station (Newly installed location at the parking lot) 
- DOFAW’s OuterSpatial App 
**It is recommended that public hunters download the OuterSpatial app, as it provides accurate 
information on access to the hunting area. 
 
Species occurring in Makua Keaʻau include ring-necked pheasant (rare), Erckel’s francolin, black 
francolin, gray francolin, barred dove, and spotted dove, with bag limits as listed in HAR Chapter 13- 
122. 
 
Additional Species: Hunting of peafowl (male/ female) is allowed in Makua Keaʻau PHA, three birds of 
either sex per hunter per day. The Nepal Kalij Pheasant (male/ female) - will be counted against the 
“Daily Bag Limits” under Ring-neck Pheasant/ Other Pheasant spp. listing. 
 
Game Mammal Hunting will be closed during the bird season. 
=== page 3 ===
PRIVATE LANDS on the island of Oʻahu will be open to game bird hunting on Saturdays, 
Sundays, and State Holidays starting from November 1, 2025, through January 25, 2026.  
 
 
ISLAND OF MAUI 
 
KULA FOREST RESERVE AND KAONOULU RANCH COOPERATIVE LEASE AREA (HUNTING UNIT C) will be 
open on Saturdays, Sundays and State Holidays for the duration of the game bird season. Game 
mammal hunting will be closed within Unit C on legal game bird hunting days. 
KAHAKULOA GMA AND WEST MAUI FOREST RESERVE (HUNTING UNIT F) will be open for game bird 
hunting on Saturdays, Sundays, and State Holidays for the entire season. 
 
Game mammal hunting will be closed within Unit F during the game bird hunting season (November 
2025 through January 2026). Game mammal hunting will commence on the first Saturday of February 
2026. 
 
PRIVATELY OWNED LANDS are open to game bird hunting on Saturdays, Sundays and State Holidays 
during the regular game bird hunting season, November 1, 2025, through January 25, 2026, with 
landowner permission and in accordance with HAR Chapter 13-122. 
 
 
ISLAND OF MOLOKAʻI 
 
MOLOKAʻI FOREST RESERVE (HUNTING UNITS C AND E) will be open for game bird hunting on 
Saturdays, Sundays, and State Holidays for the entire season. 
 
For Units C and E, game mammal hunting will be closed from November 2025 through January 
2026. Game mammal hunting will commence on the first Saturday of February 2026. 
PRIVATELY OWNED LANDS are open to game bird hunting on Saturdays, Sundays and State Holidays 
during the regular game bird hunting season, November 1, 2025, through January 25, 2026, with 
landowner permission and in accordance with HAR Chapter 13-122. 
 
 
ISLAND OF LĀNAʻI 
 
COOPERATIVE GMA (UNITS 1, and 2, AND 3) will be open for game bird hunting on Saturdays, 
Sundays, and State Holidays for the entire game bird season. Special conditions: 
1. Access to Hunting Unit 3 will be only by the main perimeter roads (“Guard Road” and “No. 57 
Road”). Abandoned field plot roads are closed for safety reasons. 
 
PRIVATELY OWNED LANDS are open to game bird hunting on Saturdays, Sundays and State Holidays 
during the regular game bird hunting season, November 1, 2025, through January 25, 2026, with 
landowner permission and in accordance with HAR Chapter 13-122. 
=== page 4 ===
ISLAND OF HAWAIʻI 
 
TWO-LINED SPITTLEBUG AWARENESS: The two-lined spittlebug (TLSB) continues to spread to areas across 
Hawaii Island and is increasingly becoming a problem for grasslands that ranchers, game birds, and hunters alike 
depend on. To prevent the spread of TLSB, please ensure that your vehicles (trucks, SUVs, ATVs, UTVs, etc.), 
boots/shoes, and hunting gear are clean of dirt, debris, and the bug itself before entering a hunting area. For 
pictures and further information, please visit https://dlnr.hawaii.gov/hisc/two-lined-spittlebug/. If you see TLSB 
or unexplainable patches of dead grass in an area you are hunting, report your observation to 643pest.org with 
photos or call the Hilo DOFAW office (808) 765-7540 
 
MAUNA KEA GAME MANAGEMENT AREA AND FOREST RESERVE AND PUʻU 
MALI MITIGATION SITE (UNIT A) and KAOHE GAME MANAGEMENT AREA AND KAOHE MITIGATION SITE (UNIT 
G) will be open for game bird hunting Wednesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays, Sundays, and state holidays for the 
entire game bird season. Mammal hunting will be closed in Unit G and Unit A on legal game bird hunting days 
during the season from November 1, 2025, through January 25, 2026. The section of the Old Lau Lease, below 
the Kaohe Mitigation Area and above the Girl Scout Camp, will be open for game bird hunting. Hunters will be 
required to check in and out at the hunter check stations located at Kilohana, Old Saddle Road Junction (off 
Daniel K. Inouye Highway across from Gilbert Kahele Recreation Area), Puʻu Huluhulu, and Puʻu Mali (entrance 
gate from Mana Road), or electronically via the OuterSpatial mobile application. Access to the Puʻu Mali area of 
Mauna Kea Forest Reserve through Mana Road (16.9 miles from Māmalahoa Highway to the gate) will have a 
combination lock. The code for this combination will be available by calling the DOFAW Hilo office (808) 974-
4221, 8:00 am to 4:30 pm, Monday-Friday. Maps of available access points will also be available at the above-
listed offices. 
 
PŌHAKULOA TRAINING AREA will be open for game bird hunting, at the direction of the Department of 
Defense, subject to the training schedule. Please visit their website at https://pta.isportsman.net/ for 
information on hunting days, open areas, and access routes. 
 
KAPĀPALA RANCH COOPERATIVE GAME MANAGEMENT AREA (CGMA, UNIT J) — Hunting in Kapāpala Ranch 
CGMA unit J is to be determined and will be announced in a separate public announcement. Please contact the 
DOFAW Hilo office (808) 974-4221 8:00 am to 4:30 pm Monday-Friday for more questions.  
 
PUʻU WAʻAWAʻA FOREST RESERVE AND PUʻU ANAHULU, WEST SECTION (UNIT F) – All sections of Puʻu 
Waʻawaʻa Forest Reserve will be open for game bird hunting on Saturdays, Sundays, and state holidays for 
the entire game bird season. Vehicles must remain on designated roads to minimize the risk of fire. Maps 
will be made available at Puʻu Waʻawaʻa Hunter Check Station. Please leave all gates as they are found due 
to active cattle ranching in the area. Vehicle access to the cell tower on the Puʻu Anahulu bluff will be 
allowed, but hunting will only be allowed below the last (5th) gate. Peafowl will be allowed to be taken in 
the hunting unit. The limit is one (1) Peafowl per hunter per day.  
 
PU‘U ANAHULU GMA, EAST SECTION will be open for game bird hunting Saturdays, Sundays, and state holidays 
for the entire game bird season. 
 
KĪPUKA ‘ĀINAHOU NĒNĒ SANCTUARY (excluding DHHL-owned portion) will be open for game bird hunting 
on Saturdays, Sundays, and state holidays throughout the game bird hunting season. A special permit is 
required and is available from the DOFAW Hilo office or at the following hunter check stations: Kaumana - 
Mile Marker 16 shooting range, Old Saddle Road Junction above Kaumana City, and at the Pu‘u Huluhulu 
Hunter Check Stations. Hunters are to avoid nēnē geese in the area. Mammal hunting in Unit E Kīpuka 
=== page 5 ===
ʻAinahou Nēnē Sanctuary is closed from November 1, 2025, through January 31, 2026. Further information 
may be obtained by contacting the DOFAW Hilo office (808) 974-4221 8:00 am to 4:30 pm Monday-Friday. 
 
 
KAHUA/PONOHOLO RANCH SPECIAL PERMIT AREA – the Cooperative Game Management Area will 
be closed to game bird hunting this year.  
 
OPEN: All other public hunting areas not listed above are open to game bird hunting on weekends and state 
holidays from November 1, 2025, through January 25, 2026, in accordance with HAR Chapter 13-122. 
 
PRIVATELY OWNED LANDS are open to game bird hunting on weekends, state holidays and Wednesdays - 
Thursdays for Units A, G, PTA and private lands during the regular game bird hunting season, November 1, 2025 
through January 25, 2026, with landowner permission and in accordance with HAR Chapter 13-122. 
 
FOR ALL AREAS STATEWIDE: 
All game bird hunters should be familiar with Title 13, Chapter 122 “Rules Regulating Game Bird Hunting”. 
Hunters will be required to check in and out at established hunter check stations or through the OuterSpatial 
mobile application unless otherwise indicated above. Landowners’ permission is required when seeking to hunt 
on private land. PLEASE PREVENT WILDFIRES BY NOT PARKING OR DRIVING IN TALL GRASS OR BRUSH! Report 
fires to 911. 
Support wildlife conservation: Report game law violators to the Division of Conservation and Resources 
Enforcement by calling 643-DLNR (-3567) or download the Hawaii Division of Conservation and Resource Tip 
application-go to: https://dlnr.hawaii.gov/docare/ . Further information may be obtained by contacting the 
Division of Forestry & Wildlife offices at the following phone numbers 
 
Kaua‘i: 274-3433 
O‘ahu: 587-0166 
Maui: 984-8100 
Molokaʻi: 553-1745 
Lāna‘i: 565-7916 
Hilo: 974-4221 
Kamuela: 887-6063 
