=== page 1 ===
2026–2027 New Mexico
New Mexico Department of Wildlife
HUNTING
C
O
N
SER
VING NEW MEXICO’S WILDLIFE SIN
C
E 1903
RULES &INFO 
Rules and Information for Big Game, Turkeys,  
Upland Game, Migratory Game Birds and Furbearers
wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
v08.11.26
=== page 2 ===
2
2026–2027
A Message from the Director 
For more than 120 years, New Mexicans have relied on the 
New Mexico Department of Game and Fish to conserve and 
protect the state’s wildlife and wild places. 
The Department remains steadfast in conserving and 
protecting as we transition to the Department of Wildlife. We 
are excited to not just carry on that tradition but build upon 
the legacy of conserving New Mexico’s wildlife for future 
generations.
At the New Mexico Department of Wildlife, we spend 
hundreds of hours annually surveying wildlife populations and partner with 
federal and state agencies as well as private landowners to protect and conserve 
wildlife. We manage hundreds of thousands of acres of land across the state to 
restore and conserve habitat for both game and non-game species. 
We also provide educational programs for conservationists, anglers, hunters and 
off-highway vehicle users to help ensure public safety. We enforce hunting and 
fishing regulations to protect New Mexico’s wildlife resources so they can be 
enjoyed by all, whether they’re hunters, birders, wildlife watchers or wildlife 
enthusiasts in general.
This work is just scratching the surface when it comes to the work our hundreds 
of employees across the state do every day to ensure that New Mexicans can 
enjoy the Land of Enchantment’s diverse wildlife for generations to come. 
We couldn’t do it without your contributions. By buying a hunting or fishing 
license, a Habitat Management and Access Validation (HMA V) or a Public Land 
User Stamp, or even by purchasing equipment such as firearms, ammunition or 
fishing equipment, you are helping to pay for wildlife and habitat conservation 
projects across the state.  
While the Department of Wildlife now has a new name, our goals remain the 
same as they have for more than 120 years: conserving New Mexico’s wildlife 
for future generations. We thank you for all you do to help us further that 
mission.
Michael B. Sloane, Director  — New Mexico Department of Wildlife
NMDOW photo, Eric Arce
=== page 3 ===
  3 
2026–2027
Contents
New Mexico Department of Wildlife . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 
(NMDOW) Information
Important Reminders  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6–9
Important Dates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
License Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12–15
Over-The-Counter (OTC) License Fees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Draw Hunt License Fees   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Draw Hunt Licenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Discounted/Special Licenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19–20
Military and Veterans  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21–22
Hunter Education  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Mentor-Youth Hunter Program   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Furbearer Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25-26
Transfers, Refunds and Donations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Chronic Wasting Disease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
General Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29–36
Carcass Tag Instructions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Criminal Trespass    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38–39
Operation Game Thief: 1-800-432-4263   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Off-Highway Vehicles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Population Management Hunts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Special Hunting Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Federal Lands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44–46
New Mexico State Lands  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47–48
Wildlife Management Areas (WMAs)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Private Lands  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  50
Native American Lands  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Open Gate Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Deer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52–68
=== page 4 ===
4
2026–2027
Contents
Elk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70–94
Private-Land Elk 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71–74
Game Management Unit Map 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82-83
Y
outh Encouragement Elk Hunts 
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.92-94
Pronghorn 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95–104
Bighorn Sheep 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 106–108
Ibex 
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
. 109–1
10
Barbary Sheep.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  111–113
Oryx 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 114–118
Turkey 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 119–121
Javelina  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
Bear 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 123–127
Cougar 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 128–131
Furbearers 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 132–140
Bobcat or Lynx
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
Mexican Gray W
olf  
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
.141
Upland Game  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 142–144
Migratory Game Birds
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 145–154
Possession (Donation) Certificate 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Glossary 
of Terms 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 158–163
This booklet is a summary of the laws and rules for hunting in New Mexico. For a complete list of the laws 
and rules that govern hunting, fishing, trapping and other outdoor activities, view the appropriate statutes in 
Chapter 17, Chapter 30 and Chapter 66 NMSA 1978 and rules in 19.30.1 through 19.36.3 NMAC.
COVER: It was a late spring morning when Dela Joyner, public information specialist for the New Mexico Department of 
Wildlife, spotted this elk in velvet, grazing about 200 yards up a hill along NM Hwy 38 near Eagle Nest, N.M. Joyner parked 
her truck and pulled out a long lens for her camera to capture the moment we are featuring on the cover of this year's 
book of Hunting Rules & Regulations. Moments like these are plenty for the taking in our beautiful state, so we here at the 
Department of Wildlife encourage you to get outside, New Mexico.
=== page 5 ===
5
2026–2027
Our Mission
To conserve, regulate, propagate and protect the wildlife and fish within the state of New 
Mexico, using a flexible management system that ensures sustainable use for public food 
supply, recreation and safety—and to provide for off-highway motor vehicle recreation 
that recognizes cultural, historic and resource values while ensuring public safety.
New Mexico State Wildlife Commissioners
Commissioner email addresses available online: https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Richard Stump, Chair, Santa Fe
Sharon Salazar Hickey, Vice Chair, Santa Fe 
Fernando Clemente, Jr., Sunland Park
Gregg Fulfer, Jal
Tirzio J. Lopez, Cebolla 
Dr. Christopher C. Witt, Albuquerque
New Mexico Department of Wildlife
One Wildlife Way, Santa Fe, NM 87507 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1-888-248-6866
Michael B. Sloane, Director
Regional Offices
Northwest Office:  7 816 Alamo Rd. NW, Albuquerque, NM 87120  . 505-222-4700
Southwest Office:  2 715 Northrise Drive, Las Cruces, NM 88011 .  .  .575-532-2100
Northeast Office:  2 15 York Canyon Road, Raton, NM 87740  . . . . 575-445-2311
P .O. Box 1145, Raton, NM 87740
Southeast Office:  1 615 West College Boulevard, .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .575-624-6135
Roswell, NM 88201
Conservation Officer Contact Information
https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/enforcement/law-enforcement-contact-information/
Online Licenses, Applications and Harvest Reporting
https://onlinesales.wildlife.state.nm.us
Important Telephone Numbers
General Information, License Sales and Harvest Reporting  . . . . . 1-888-248-6866
Bear and Cougar Zone Closure and Harvest Hotline .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1-877-950-5466
Hunter Education Program Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505-222-4731
Off-Highway Vehicle (OHV) Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505-222-4728
Operation Game Thief (OGT)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1-800-432-4263
24-hour Depredation Hotline  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1-888-727-4883
TDD (number for hearing impaired)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   505-476-8043
The contents of the printed version of the 2026-2027 New Mexico Hunting Rules and Information Booklet may 
be updated or corrected on occasion. For the most current information, visit https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/home/
publications, as the digital version of the booklet is updated regularly. 
New Mexico Hunting Rules and Information 2026–2027 is published by the New Mexico Department of Wildlife, Information 
and Education Division, One Wildlife Way, Santa Fe, NM 87507 © 2026. 
=== page 6 ===
6
2026–2027
Important Reminders
Mandatory Harvest Reporting
All Barbary sheep, deer, elk, ibex, javelina, oryx, pronghorn, turkey and trapper 
license holders must submit a harvest report, whether they hunted or not. Deadlines 
by species are listed on page 10. Harvest reports may be submitted online, by 
telephone or in person at NMDOW offices. Failure to report by the deadline(s) will 
result in rejection of all draw applications. Remember to keep your confirmation 
number! 
License Fee Increase
License fees have changed this year. See pages 16-17 for details.
Shed Hunting License Required for Non-Residents
All non-resident shed antler hunters must purchase a Shed Hunting License. 
See page 12.
Private-land Pronghorn License Limits
There is now a limit on the number of private-land pronghorn licenses in GMUs 41, 
42, 47, 56, 57, 58 and 59 (pages 95 – 104).
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Discount (SNAP)
New Mexico residents participating in SNAP are eligible for a 25% discount on 
NMDOW licenses.
Chronic Wasting Disease
Chronic Wasting Disease rules now apply in Unit 29 (page 28).
Electronic Tag (E-Tag) Option for Big Game and Turkey
Hunters may choose the E-Tag option when purchasing or applying for any big-game 
or turkey hunt. You will not receive a carcass tag if you choose this option. Hunters 
who choose the E-Tag option are required to download the NM E-Tag app each year 
on their smartphone, and must be able to show the license on their phone while in 
the field. A printed license and/or carcass tag are not required, but the animal must 
still be physically tagged. The E-Tag app must be deleted and reinstalled each license 
year. See page 13 for details.
Update Your NMDOW Account
All hunters should update their account in the Department's Online Licensing 
System if any of their information has changed. Hunters are strongly encouraged 
to provide a valid e-mail address. If you are unable to access your account, do not 
create a new account. Call 1-888-248-6866 for assistance.
Non-Resident Hunter Education Age Restriction
Hunter Education certificates from other states are valid only for youth hunters age 9 
and older.
Federal Duck Stamp Changes 
The electronic duck stamp is now valid for the entire waterfowl season. Physical 
duck stamps will be mailed after March 10 annually.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 7 ===
7
2026–2027
White Sands Missile Range and Fort Bliss Hunter 
Education Requirement  
All hunters, regardless of age, on White Sands Missile Range (WSMR) and Fort 
Bliss in GMUs 19 and 28 are required to have proof of passing a state-certified 
Hunter Education course. Mentor-youth hunters are not eligible.
Open Sights Only for Muzzleloaders
Only open (iron) or peep sights are allowed on muzzle-loading rifles when used 
during a muzzleloader hunt (Hunt Codes: XXX-3-XXX). Scopes, red dots and all 
other optical sights are prohibited.
Bear and Cougar Hunting on WMAs
Deer and elk hunters who draw WMA hunts may harvest a bear or cougar during 
their deer and/or elk hunt dates, using the same weapon types, if the zone is open for 
bear and cougar hunting, and they possess a Bear and/or Cougar License.
Bear Hunting Changes
Bear Management Zone (BMZ) 7 has been dissolved.  GMU 57 is now part of BMZ 
5, and GMUs 56 and 58 are part of BMZ 6.  Bear season will open on August 16 in 
BMZs 12 and 13.
License/Tag Combo Available Online or by Phone
Hunters who choose to receive a physical carcass tag may not need to carry a 
separate license. If the license is applied for or purchased online or by telephone, 
the top section of the carcass tag will serve as a valid license. Hunters must carry 
the license/carcass tag with them in the field while hunting (see page 37). If you 
do not purchase the Habitat Stamp through the draw, or prior to May 15, 2026, a 
printed copy may be required. The combined license/tag is not available for license 
purchases and/or duplicate tags at over-the-counter (OTC) license vendors. 
Draw Carcass Tags will be Mailed
Successful draw applicants who did not choose the E-Tag option will receive the 
license/tag(s) via U.S. Postal Service in June. Please ensure the mailing address 
you've provided is correct.
Habitat Stamp
The Habitat Stamp must be purchased prior to hunting or fishing on BLM and Forest 
Service lands. To be included in a combined draw license/tag, the Habitat Stamp 
must be purchased before May 15, 2026. The Habitat Stamp must be carried while in 
the field.
Buy 2026-27 Hunting License through the Draw Application
Draw applicants purchasing 2026-27 Game-Hunting Licenses to apply for draw 
hunts must click “Draw Hunt Applications” in the main menu and purchase the 
license as part of the application process. Do not click “License Sales 2025.”
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 8 ===
2026–2027
8
Important Reminders
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Early Purchase Available for 2026–27 Licenses
Licenses for the 2026–27 license year beginning April 1 will be available online, by 
telephone, and at license vendors and NMDOW offices beginning March 25.
Duplicate License Fee
A $6 duplicate license fee will be charged for all duplicate tags/licenses in 
accordance with New Mexico state law. This fee will be charged only when a 
duplicate tag is obtained requiring reprinting license with a new tag number. 
Over the Counter (OTC) Licenses  
for Some Species Available July 1
OTC licenses for javelina, fall turkey, private-land deer, private-land pronghorn, 
private-land Barbary sheep, secondary management zone private-land elk and 
federal Duck Stamps will be available beginning July 1.
Information Center Extended Hours 
The NMDOW Information Center is open year-round, Monday–Friday, 8 a.m.–5 
p.m. (except state holidays) to answer your questions and assist with license issues
and harvest reporting. Extended hours are March 9-13 and March 16-17 from
8 a.m.–6 p.m. The Information Center will close at 4:30 p.m. on March 18.
Requirements for Military Documentation
Proof of service for all military-only hunts and veteran oryx hunts must be received 
by NMDOW prior to draw application.
Draw Refunds
Draw license fee refunds for unsuccessful applicants will be processed shortly 
after draw results are released in April. Applications paid by credit card will be 
refunded directly to the credit card used for the transaction within 10 business days. 
Applications paid by cash will be refunded by check by the end of May. Game-
Hunting License and stamp purchases will not be refunded. 
Draw Permits
All successful Bear, Turkey, Pheasant and Sandhill Crane Draw Permit applicants 
must validate their draw permit by purchasing the appropriate over-the-counter 
(OTC) license.

=== page 9 ===
2026–2027
  9 
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
50% Discount for Resident Military and Veterans
New Mexico residents who are active-duty military or honorably discharged veterans 
are eligible for a 50% discount on all licenses, permits and stamps. Proof of service 
may be requested to verify eligibility. See page 21, 158 and 163 for eligibility 
requirements and details.
Hunting Maps
A variety of maps, including Big Game Management Units, bighorn sheep and 
turkey ranges, the Silver City Management Area, elk private lands, pronghorn 
private lands and state lands are available online: https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/
hunting/maps/ 
Contact Land Management Agencies Before Hunting
Prescribed burns, wildfires, closures and other activities that could affect hunting 
may occur on public lands or be conducted by land-management agencies during 
hunting seasons. NMDOW recommends contacting the appropriate management 
agency prior to your hunt for information on activities that may affect access or 
animal behavior in your hunting area. Visit: nmfireinfo.com. For agency contact 
information, please see pages 44–48.
Mexican Gray Wolf: Encounters and Identification
Know where wolf encounters may occur and how to distinguish the Mexican gray 
wolf from coyotes (page 141).
Legal Shooting Hours
Legal shooting hours for big game, furbearers, upland game and turkey are from one 
half-hour before sunrise to one  half-hour after sunset, unless otherwise noted. Legal 
shooting hours for migratory game birds are one  half-hour before sunrise to sunset.
Marked Game Animals
It is legal to harvest a game animal with a collar, eartag or other human-placed 
identifying mark. Please contact NMDOW at 505-476-8038  to return collars, as they 
store data and can be used on another animal.
No Trapping on Public Lands
It is illegal to set a trap or snare on public lands. See page 132 for more information.
NMDOW photo
=== page 10 ===
2026–2027
 10 
Important Dates
Feb. 11 Deadline to apply for Bear and Turkey Draw Permits. Applications must be 
completed before 5 p.m. Mountain Time (MT).
Feb. 15 Deadline to submit 2025–26 harvest reports for deer, elk, pronghorn 
and turkey license holders. Free reports can be submitted online or by 
telephone. Late fees apply after this date.
Feb. 18 Results for Bear and Turkey Draw Permits are available online, by 
telephone and at NMDOW offices. Permits will be available in the E-Tag 
app and can be printed on standard paper after the appropriate license(s) 
are purchased. 
Mar. 18 Deadline to apply for draw licenses for Barbary sheep, bighorn sheep, deer, 
elk, ibex, javelina, pronghorn, oryx and private-land only deer in Units 2A, 
2B, 2C, 4 and 5A. Applications must be completed before 5 p.m. Mountain 
Daylight Time (MDT).
Mar. 18 Deadline to submit late 2025–26 harvest reports for deer, elk, pronghorn 
and turkey. All 2025–26 license holders must report to be eligible for 
2026–27 draw licenses. Reports can be submitted online or by telephone. 
Failure to report for these species by this date will result in rejection 
of all draw applications. An $8 late fee applies after Feb. 15, 2026. 
Remember to keep your confirmation number.
Mar. 25 2026–27 over-the-counter (OTC) license types, including Game-Hunting 
Licenses and Game-Hunting & Fishing Licenses, are available online, by 
telephone, at NMDOW offices and at license vendors.
April 1  2026–27 license year begins. All 2025–26 licenses are no longer valid.
April 7 Deadline to submit 2025–26 harvest reports for Barbary Sheep, Ibex, 
Javelina, Oryx and Trapper License holders to be eligible for big-game 
licenses. Reports can be submitted online or by telephone. Failure to 
report for these species by this date will result in rejection of all draw 
applications. An $8 late fee applies after April 7, 2026. Remember to keep 
your confirmation number.
April 22 Big-game draw results are available online, by telephone or at NMDOW 
offices.
Aug. 12 Deadline to apply for Pheasant and Sandhill Crane Draw Permits. 
Applications must be completed before 5 p.m. Mountain Daylight Time 
(MDT).  
Aug. 19 Results for Pheasant and Sandhill Crane Draw Permits are available online, 
by telephone and at NMDOW offices. Permits can be printed on standard 
paper after the appropriate license(s) are purchased.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 11 ===
  11 
2026–2027
License - Tag Combo
Purchase of a license-tag combo online, by telephone or in 
person at NMDOW offices allows the hunter to carry a single 
document in the field. 
See page 13 for details.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 12 ===
12 
2026–2027
License Requirements
License, Stamp and Validation Requirements
You must have all of the following while in the field: 
1. All hunters must possess a valid license, and permit if applicable, for the species and
hunt type in which they will participate, and must be able to produce the license upon
request by a conservation officer
.
2. All big-game, upland-game, migratory game bird and turkey hunters must possess a
Game-Hunting License or Game-Hunting & Fishing License.
3. All big-game and turkey hunters must possess a carcass tag for each species hunted,
unless the E-T
ag option is chosen. If E-Tag is chosen, hunters must be able to show
their license on their smartphone.
4. All hunters and anglers on any Forest Service or Bureau of Land Management lands
must possess a Habitat Stamp. See exceptions on page 14
.
5. All hunters, trappers and anglers 18 years and older must possess a Habitat Manage-
ment and 
Access Validation (HMA V) on public and/or private lands. (See exceptions
page 14).
6. All hunters 17 years of age and younger must possess a Hunter Education or mentor
-
youth number.
7. All hunters and trappers on private lands must possess written permission from the
landowner
. (See definition and exceptions on page 50).
8. All furbearer trappers and hunters 18 years of age and older must possess a 
Trapper
License. The license will display whether you are authorized to hunt and trap, or hunt
only.
9. All furbearer trappers and hunters 12–17 years of age are required to possess a Junior
Trapper License (Hunter Education also required if hunting furbearers). No license is
required for NM residents 1
1 years of age or younger; however, all other laws apply.
10. All non-residents 12 and older hunting or trapping furbearers, or trapping nongame
species are required to possess a Non-resident 
Trapper License.
11. All non-resident hunters hunting nongame species must possess a non-resident Hunt-
ing or 
Trapper License.
12. All migratory game bird hunters are required to obtain a Harvest Information Program
(HIP) number
.
13. All waterfowl hunters 16 years of age or older are required 
to purchase a Federal Duck
Stamp.
14. All non-resident shed antler hunters must purchase a Shed Hunting License to possess
more than two shed antlers.
Hunter Responsibility
It is the responsibility of each hunter to know and comply with all applicable license, 
stamp, permit and/or tag requirements.
Purchasing Licenses, Stamps and Validations
Each individual purchasing a license or applying for a draw hunt must have a 
NMDOW account with a customer identification number (CIN). Accounts can 
be accessed and created online: https://onlinesales.wildlife.state.nm.us  or by 
telephone at 1-888-248-6866 . If any issues are encountered, please contact NMDOW. 
DO NOT create a duplicate account. Licenses, tags, stamps and validations are 
available online, by telephone and in person at NMDOW offices and local vendors. 
Information and requirements for the Habitat Stamp and Habitat Management and 
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 13 ===
  13 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Access Validation (HMAV) are described on page 14. Please note, before March 
25, Game-Hunting Licenses and stamps for the 2026–27 season can be purchased 
through the draw application process. Restrictions may apply for online big-game 
license purchases. Licenses and permits can be printed on standard paper in the 
customer's account if the physical tag is chosen, but all big-game and turkey hunters 
must also obtain a carcass tag(s) from NMDOW or a license vendor prior to hunting, 
unless the E-Tag option was chosen. Draw permits may not be printed until the 
appropriate OTC license(s) is purchased.
E-Tag Option for Big Game and Turkey
When purchasing or applying for a license, hunters may choose either the E-Tag 
option or a physical tag. Hunters MUST be able to show their license on their 
phone. After any physical tag has been issued by NMDOW , the E-Tag option 
may not be used. 
How to E-Tag
Prior to hunting, hunters must download the NM E-Tag app to their mobile phone 
each year, login while in service, and remain logged in while hunting— DO NOT 
log out. Upon harvesting an animal, the hunter must immediately click the Tag My 
Animal link in the app. The hunter will receive their E-Tag number with their CIN 
and the date of kill, which must be handwritten on a durable material (e.g. duct 
tape or flagging ribbon) in permanent ink and attached to the animal (see Tagging 
Instructions, page 37). The app will work even while out of service as long as the 
license is verified prior to leaving cell service. Hunters choosing to E-Tag must 
still submit a harvest report. Hunters should delete and reinstall the E-Tag app 
each license year.
License/Carcass Tag Combo
Unless the E-Tag option is chosen, a license/carcass tag combination will be issued 
when Big-Game or Turkey Licenses are purchased online, by phone and in person at 
NMDOW offices. The license/tag combo includes everything hunters need to carry 
in the field, provided that the Habitat Stamp (if applicable) has been purchased prior 
to May 15, 2026, for all draw licenses.
Obtaining License/Tag Combo
•  A license/tag and permit are available immediately if purchased at an NMDOW office.
•  A license/tag will be mailed to all successful big-game draw applicants, unless the  
E-Tag option is chosen.
•  Telephone or online purchases for Javelina and Private-Land Barbary Sheep, Deer, Elk, 
Oryx and Pronghorn Licenses must be made at least 14 days prior to the start of the 
hunt to allow time to mail the license/carcass tag. The license/tag will be mailed to the  
address provided by the customer for each species. 
•  Customers may obtain a $6 duplicate license/tag combination in person at NMDOW 
offices only. If a duplicate tag is obtained, the original tag number will be invalidated. It 
is unlawful to use an invalidated license/tag.
• See page 37 for more information and instructions for tagging.
=== page 14 ===
 14  
2026–2027
Purchases at OTC License Vendors
The license/tag combination will not  be available for Big-Game or Turkey 
Licenses and duplicate tags purchased at OTC license vendors . Both a tag and a 
printed license will be required.
Required Stamps
Habitat Management and Access Validation (HMAV)
A Habitat Management and Access Validation (HMAV) must be purchased and 
possessed by all hunters, trappers or anglers, except individuals 17 years of age 
and younger, resident anglers 70 years and older (free fishing license) and resident 
100% disabled veteran card holders. Only one HMAV each license year is required. 
Funds from the sale are used to lease access to private lands for public use, provide 
public access to landlocked public land, and provide improvement, maintenance, 
development and operation of State Wildlife Commission property for fish and 
wildlife habitat management. The HMAV will automatically be added to the 
shopping cart with your first purchase of a hunting, fishing or trapping license if 
required.
Habitat Stamp
Hunters and anglers must purchase and possess a current Habitat Stamp for U.S. 
Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management (BLM) lands in New Mexico, 
except anglers 11 years of age and younger, resident anglers 70 years and older (free 
fishing license) and resident 100% disabled veteran card holders. Only one stamp is 
required each license year for these lands. The stamp is not required on withdrawn 
BLM lands in Unit 28, on other public property, or on private property. Funds from 
the sale of habitat stamps are used to improve wildlife habitat. All hunters, trappers 
and anglers are encouraged to purchase a Habitat Stamp.
Harvest Information Program Number (HIP) 
Each year, migratory game bird hunters must obtain a separate federal HIP number 
for each state in which they hunt migratory game birds.
Duck Stamp
Federal law requires all waterfowl hunters 16 years of age or older to purchase a 
federal Migratory Bird Hunting & Conservation Stamp (Duck Stamp). Stamps are 
available online: https://onlinesales.wildlife.state.nm.us  or duckstamp.com  and at 
U.S. Post Offices, NMDOW offices and at all license vendors beginning July 1 each 
year. Hunters must either carry a physical duck stamp signed in ink across the face 
or a valid hunting license that displays "Federal Duck Stamp" to meet the federal 
requirement.
New Mexico Residency Requirements
To qualify for New Mexico resident license(s), one of the criteria below must be met:
1. A United States citizen who has resided in New Mexico for a period of not less than 90 
days immediately preceding the date of application (or purchase) for the license, has 
been domiciled in New Mexico, and has not claimed residency elsewhere for any pur-
License Requirements
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 15 ===
  15 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
pose. Temporary or seasonal residents and homeowners , who maintain a primary 
residence outside of New Mexico, do not qualify for resident licenses.
2. A citizen of another country who is legally in the United States and has lived in New 
Mexico for at least 90 days immediately preceding his/her license application (or pur-
chase).
3. A student, not otherwise entitled to claim residence, who is attending any educational 
institution in New Mexico, has attended and actually has lived in the state for at least 
one full semester immediately preceding the application (or purchase) for a license. 
Students must present a certificate or letter verifying their enrollment and attendance 
from the proper authorities of the educational institution.
4. A member of the U.S. military, not otherwise entitled to claim residence, who is perma-
nently assigned to a military installation located within New Mexico and who presents 
with his/her application a certificate or letter that verifies the military assignment and 
is signed by the commanding officer. The spouse or dependent of such person, living 
within the same household and similarly certified by the person's commanding officer 
may also purchase resident licenses.
5. A member of the U.S. military who is officially stationed at Fort Bliss and who presents 
a certificate or letter to NMDOW that verifies the military assignment and is signed by 
the commanding officer, prior to application. This applies only for draw-hunt licenses 
on Fort Bliss. Fort Bliss personnel must pay non-resident license fees for all other 
hunts. The 50% resident military and veteran discount does not apply.
License Information Is Public Record
Pursuant to the New Mexico Inspection of Public Records Act, Sections 14–2–1 et. 
seq. NMSA 1978, all information provided when applying for licenses and permits 
is public record and must be disclosed to anyone when properly requested except as 
provided by law. 
Rabbits and Other Nongame Species
Common nongame species include coyotes, skunks, porcupines, rabbits and rock 
squirrels. New Mexico residents are not required to have a license to take nongame 
species. Non-residents must possess either a non-resident Nongame License or a 
current New Mexico non-resident Game-Hunting License. Nongame species may be 
taken on U.S. Forest Service and BLM lands open to hunting. Nongame species may 
also be taken on State Trust Lands that are opened by easement, provided the hunter 
holds a valid license for protected species on those lands and he/she is hunting during 
the season(s) designated for that license. White-sided jackrabbits, found primarily in 
Hidalgo County, are protected under the New Mexico Wildlife Conservation Act and 
may not be hunted. 
Protected Bird Species
Game-Hunting licenses do not allow hunting for protected birds for which there is 
no season, including eagles, hawks, falcons, owls, vultures, crows, ravens and all 
songbirds. Unprotected birds are starlings, rock doves (common pigeons) and house 
sparrows (English sparrows). No license is required for residents for unprotected 
species, but non-residents must have a valid NM hunting license.
=== page 16 ===
16 
2026–2027
OTC License Fees
2026-27 Over-the-Counter (OTC) License Fees
A license vendor fee will apply to all OTC transactions   A n additional fee may be 
applied per carcass tag issued at non-NMDOW vendors   
See page 73 for Private-
Land Elk License fees   Vendors: for instructions and forms,  
please visit https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/home/contact/license-vendors/
License Type Resident Non-resident
Game-Hunting License 1 $25 $90
Game-Hunting & Fishing License 2 $42 Not Issued
Junior Game-Hunting License 1 $10 $20
Junior Game-hunting & Fishing License 2 $15 Not Issued
Senior or Disabled Game-Hunting License 1 $15 Not Issued
Senior or Disabled Game-Hunting & Fishing License 2 $20 Not Issued 
Disabled Veteran Game-Hunting & Fishing License 2, 3 $10 Not Issued
Private-Land Only Deer License – Standard $53 $385
Private-Land Only Deer License – Quality $53 $610
Private-Land Only Deer License – Junior/Senior $28 Not Issued
Private-Land Only Pronghorn License $63 $410
Turkey License (Spring and/or Fall Season) $35 $125
Bear License $58 $360
Cougar License $58 $360
Private-Land Only Oryx License $178 $1,610
Barbary Sheep License (Public or Private Land) $123 $360
Ibex License $113 $1,610
Javelina License $58 $165 
Temporary Game-Hunting License (4 days)* , 1 Not Issued $40
* Does not enable purchase of big-game or turkey licenses.
Nongame Hunting License (see page 29) Not Issued $65
Trapper License $50 $500
Junior Trapper License $20 Not Issued
Shed Hunting License Not Issued $200
Habitat Stamp* $10 $10
* Mandatory for hunting and fishing on federal U.S. Forest Service or BLM lands. See page 14
Habitat Management and Access Validation* $4 $4
* Mandatory for hunting, fishing and trapping. This validation does not replace habitat stamp. See page 14.
Duplicate license/tag $6 $6
Harvest Information Program (HIP) Number* $0 $0
* Required for hunting migratory game birds
Federal Duck Stamp* $29 $29
* Required for waterfowl hunting (ducks and geese), age 16 and older
1 Valid for small game (definition, see page 162).  2 Valid for small game and fishing.  3 50% NM resident 
military/veteran discount does not apply.
Before March 25, Game-Hunting Licenses, Game-Hunting & Fishing Licenses and stamps for the 
2026–2027 license year are unavailable through license sales and must be purchased through the draw 
application process.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 17 ===
  17 
2026–2027
Draw Hunt License Fees
All draw license fees include a nonrefundable application fee (residents: $7;  
non-residents: $13). Nonresidents are ineligible to apply for antlerless elk  
and WMA draw hunts.
Standard Elk License  
(Residents 18–64 years of age and all non-residents) Resident
Non-
resident
A (Antlerless) $70 Not Issued
MB (Mature Bull) $100 $773
ES (Either Sex) $100 $773
Quality or High-Demand Elk License (page 70)
A $70 Not Issued
MB $100 $998
ES $100 $998
Junior/Senior Elk License (See page 19 for eligibility requirements)
A $70 Not issued
MB $70 Not issued
ES $70 Not issued
Deer License
Standard (S) $60 $398
Quality (Q) $60 $623
High-Demand (HD) $60 $623
Junior/Senior $35 Not issued
Pronghorn License $70 $423
Javelina License $65 $178
Bighorn Sheep License
Ram $160 $3,523
Ewe $85 $3,523
Oryx License $185 $1,623
Ibex License $120 $1,623
Barbary Sheep License $130 $373
Bear Permit  (application fee only 1) $7 $13
Turkey Permit (application fee only 1) $7 $13
1 Successful applicants must purchase a 2026–27 Game-Hunting License or a Game-Hunting & Fishing 
License, plus the applicable over-the-counter license and stamp(s) beginning March 25. Carcass tag 
required, unless the E-Tag option is chosen.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 18 ===
 18 
2026–2027
Draw Hunt Licenses
Application Requirements
When applying for draw licenses for Barbary sheep, bighorn sheep, deer, elk, ibex, 
javelina, oryx and pronghorn, hunters must purchase a nonrefundable 2026–2027 
Game-Hunting License or Game-Hunting & Fishing License and HMAV if 
applicable.
Game-Hunting Licenses and stamps are available online  or by telephone through 
the draw application process . Before March 25, Game-Hunting License s and stamps 
for the 2026–2027 license year may be purchased only through the draw application 
process. Successful applicants for draw licenses will be mailed a combination 
license/tag, unless the E-Tag option is chosen.
Application and full license fees for each species are charged at the time the 
application is submitted. Unsuccessful draw applicants will be refunded the draw 
license fee, but not the application or any other license fee. 
To apply for Bear, Sandhill Crane, Pheasant or Turkey Draw Permits, no license 
purchase is required. If the applicant is successful in the draw, purchase of a Bear 
or Turkey License with tag will be required; a Game-Hunting License will be 
required for pheasant and sandhill crane . Permits will not be available until the 
appropriate license(s) are purchased.
How the Draw Hunt System Works 
All draw applications are entered into an automated system that randomly assigns 
each application a sequence number. Based on this number, and the quotas listed 
below, the system matches the first, second then third choices on the application 
with available licenses or permits. If all choices have already been awarded, the 
system advances to the next application. New Mexico does not grant preference to 
previously unsuccessful applicants. If a fourth-choice hunt is entered for deer or elk, 
the applicant may be awarded any hunt for the same sporting arm as the first choice 
on the application that has not allocated all available licenses. Only successful 
applicants will be notified by email. Unsuccessful applicants will not be notified, 
but may check their NMDOW account online. For more information,  
visit: https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/hunting/applications-and-draw-information/ .
Drawing Quotas: State law establishes the following quotas for all draw hunts:
• A minimum of 84% of draw licenses are awarded to New Mexico residents.
• 10% of draw licenses are awarded to residents and non-residents applying with a 
New Mexico registered outfitter.  
• 6% of draw licenses are awarded to non-residents applying without a New Mexico 
registered outfitter. 
• 100% of draw licenses for antlerless elk and hunts held exclusively on Wildlife 
Management Areas are awarded to New Mexico residents.
• Population management hunts are not subject to quota.
Non-resident and Outfitted Applicants Please Note: It is extremely unlikely 
for an outfitted applicant to draw a hunt code with six or fewer licenses or for a non-
resident to draw a hunt code with 12 or fewer licenses. Residents planning to apply 
with one or more non-residents should also be aware of this when applying. 
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 19 ===
  19  
2026–2027
Reduced-Fee Licenses for Juniors
Reduced-fee licenses for resident junior game hunting and fishing, junior deer,  
junior elk, junior trapper and junior game hunting (resident and non-resident) are 
available to individuals 17 years of age and younger at the time of purchase, on or 
after April 1, 2026. Resident junior licenses for hunting deer and/or elk on private 
land may be purchased at license vendors, NMDOW offices, by telephone or online.
Youth-Only Hunts 
To qualify for youth-only hunts, applicants must be 17 years of age or younger on 
opening day of the hunt and must possess a Hunter Education number or mentor-
youth number (page 23-24). The mentor-youth number is valid only for deer, 
pronghorn, turkey, javelina and small-game hunts.
Reduced-Fee Licenses for Resident Seniors
Reduced-fee licenses for senior Game-Hunting & Fishing, senior elk or senior  
deer are available to residents 65 years or older at the time of purchase, on or before 
April 1, 2026. Senior licenses for hunting deer and/or elk on private land can be 
purchased at NMDOW offices and license vendors, by telephone or online.
Off-Range Oryx Hunt for Seniors 70 Years and Older
To qualify for the off-range oryx senior hunt, applicants must be 70 years of age or 
older on the opening day of the hunt.
Reduced-Fee Licenses for Disabled Residents
A reduced-fee Game-Hunting & Fishing License is available to New Mexico 
residents with a permanent disability in accordance with the Americans with 
Disabilities Act. Applicants must attest that they have one or more disabilities that 
substantially limit major life activities.
Resident disabled license holders must purchase and possess a Habitat Stamp and 
HMAV (page 14) as applicable. All other laws and rules must be followed.
Mobility-Impaired Certification (MI)
MI certification by NMDOW  is required prior to submitting an application for 
MI-only pronghorn, oryx, elk or deer draw hunts. To qualify for MI Certification, 
an individual must have a permanent impairment that limits his/her mobility to a 
walker, wheelchair or crutches and/or have one or more permanent disabilities or 
conditions that substantially limit his/her ability to walk. The MI Certification form 
is available online or may be requested by telephone. This form must be signed by 
the applicant’s physician and attest that one or more of the above mobility-impaired 
conditions apply. 
The MI card is valid for 48 months from the date approved/issued by NMDOW . All 
other laws and rules must be followed.
For further information call: 1-888-248-6866  or email: special.hunts@dgf.nm.gov .
Discounted/Special Licenses 
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 20 ===
 20 
2026–2027
Mobility-Impaired (MI) Hunters
A Mobility-Impaired Card allows a hunter to: 1) shoot from a stationary motor-
driven vehicle only when it has been parked completely off of the established road 
surface and there is no right-of-way fence;  2) have one assistant to help track and kill 
big game that has been clearly wounded by the MI hunter. The assistant must have 
written authorization from the MI hunter and must use the same sporting-arm 
type as the MI hunter ; 3) use a crossbow during a bow hunt.
Reasonable Accommodation Permits
Hunters with injuries or conditions that don't qualify for the Mobility Impaired 
certification may request specific disability accommodations on a case-by-case basis. 
For more information, email special.hunts@ dgf.nm.gov or call 1-888-248-6866 .
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Discount
New Mexico residents participating in the supplemental nutrition assistance program 
(SNAP) are eligible to receive a 25% discount on all licenses as established in 17-3-
13 NMSA for the following license year. The Department will qualify individuals 
for the following license year discount between January 1 and January 10 annually. 
If not qualified by the Department in January, applicants may prove eligibility in 
person at any Department office to have the discount applied. No refunds will be 
offered for full-fee purchases made prior to verification of eligibility.
Title VI Funding
This agency receives Federal financial assistance from the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service. Under Title VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, Section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 
the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, and Title IX of the Education Amendments of 
1972. The U.S. Department of the Interior prohibits discrimination on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, sex, or disability.
If you believe that you have been discriminated against in any facility,  
program, or activity, or if you need more information, please write to:  
Office of Diversity, Inclusion, and Civil Rights, U.S. Department of the Interior, 
1849 C Street, NW, Washington, D.C. 20240
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Discounted/Special Licenses 
NMDOW photo, 
Eric Arce
=== page 21 ===
  21 
2026–2027
Military and Veteran Licenses and Hunt Opportunities 
NMDOW acknowledges the contribution and sacrifice of active military and veterans 
with several discounted licenses and special hunting opportunities. Information about 
active military and veteran hunting and fishing opportunities and how to apply is 
available online and by telephone. 
50% Discount for Resident Active Military and Veterans
A 50% discount on all licenses, permits and stamps is available to New Mexico 
residents who are active-duty military or honorably discharged veterans. The 
discount may be claimed by applying for or purchasing any license, permit or stamp 
online, by telephone or at any license vendor. Residents claiming this discount must 
be able to provide proof of active-duty military ( page 158) or honorably discharged 
veteran status ( page 163) upon request. Discount does not apply to: application fees, 
license vendor fees, administrative fees, duplicate license fees, the federal Duck 
Stamp or the resident Disabled Veteran Game-Hunting & Fishing License.
Military-Only Draw Hunts:
Proof of Active Military Status Required Prior to Application
Military-only draw hunts are available on McGregor Range in GMU 28 (Fort Bliss) 
for deer, elk, pronghorn, oryx, Barbary sheep and javelina. Each license year, 
applicants must provide proof of full-time, active-duty status. Veterans and reservists 
are not eligible for military-only hunts. Orders or other documentation (excluding 
military ID cards) of current active-duty service must be received by NMDOW  prior 
to application. Proof of service  may be submitted by email: special.hunts@dgf.
nm.gov fax: 505-476-8180  or U.S. Mail: NMDOW Special Hunts, One Wildlife Way,  
Santa Fe, NM 87507. 
100% Disabled Resident Veterans
New Mexico residents who are 100% disabled as a result of having served in the 
U.S. military are eligible for a free Lifetime Game-Hunting & Fishing License. The 
disabled veteran must apply for a Disabled Veteran Card. This card is issued by 
the NMDOW and allows the cardholder to fish, hunt small game and obtain a deer 
hunting license free of charge. The deer hunting license will be issued only if the 
cardholder has applied and been successful in the draw for deer, or if the cardholder 
obtains written permission from a landowner for a private-land deer hunt. The free 
deer hunting license must be applied for each license year, and no preference is given 
for public-land deer draws . A HMAV and a Habitat Stamp (page 14) are not required.
Disabled Veteran Game-Hunting & Fishing License
New Mexico residents who are disabled veterans of the U.S. military, but do not meet 
the 100% disabled qualification, are eligible for a $10 combination Game-Hunting & 
Fishing License. Disabled veterans may purchase this license online, by telephone or 
at license vendors.  
Military & Veterans
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 22 ===
 22 
2026–2027
Oryx Draw Hunt for Resident Veterans on White Sands Missile Range
New Mexico resident veterans who have never held a once-in-a-lifetime Oryx 
License are eligible to apply for a once-in-a-lifetime oryx hunt, available by drawing 
each license year. New Mexico resident fees apply. Applicants must submit their DD-
214 demonstrating honorable discharge prior to application each year, unless their 
resident veteran status has already been verified by NMDOW , or they are registered 
as a 100% Disabled Veteran. Copies may be submitted by email:  
special.hunts@dgf.nm.gov  fax: 505-476-8180  or  
U.S. Mail: NMDOW Special Hunts, One Wildlife Way, Santa Fe, NM 87507 .
Fort Bliss Opportunities
Active-duty military personnel stationed at Fort Bliss in El Paso, Texas are eligible 
for resident fees on draw hunts that occur on Fort Bliss Military Reservation in New 
Mexico. Each year, prior to application, proof of assignment must be submitted by 
email: special.hunts@dgf.nm.gov  by fax: 505-476-8180  or received by mail.
Resident Fees for Non-resident Active-duty and Veteran  
Rehabilitation Program Enrollees
Non-resident active-duty members or veterans of the U.S. Armed Forces who are 
undergoing a rehabilitation program that involves hunting activities are eligible for 
a resident fee on Deer, Elk, Javelina, Oryx, Pronghorn and Turkey Licenses. The 
rehabilitation program must be sponsored by the federal government, or a nonprofit 
organization authorized by the federal government, and it must be under the 
direction of a military or federal Veterans Administration rehabilitation center.  
This benefit is not available through the draw . Proof of eligibility must be 
provided. This benefit is available only through the NMDOW  Santa Fe office.
Special Oryx Draw for Injured Service Members
Injured active-duty and veterans of the U.S. Armed Forces with a disability rating of 
50% or greater qualify for a special drawing for oryx on White Sands Missile Range. 
License(s) must be purchased by successful applicants, but there is no fee to apply. 
For eligibility and application information, please call 888-248-6866  after June 1, 
2026.
Special Military/Veteran Pronghorn Draws 
Resident Purple Heart recipients and full-time active-duty military personnel 
permanently stationed in New Mexico qualify for special drawings for pronghorn on 
Melrose Airforce Range. License(s) must be purchased by successful applicants, but 
there is no fee to apply. For eligibility and application information, please call  
888-248-6866  after June 1, 2026.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Military & Veterans
 22 
=== page 23 ===
  23 
2026–2027
Hunter Education
Hunter Education Program 
Before purchasing a Game-Hunting License, all hunters 17 years of age and younger 
must obtain a Hunter Education number issued by New Mexico or another state or 
possess a New Mexico mentor-youth number. Hunter Education numbers issued by 
other states are no longer valid for hunters younger than 9 years of age. The Hunter 
Education number is valid for hunting all game species. The mentor-youth number is 
valid only for deer, pronghorn, turkey, javelina and small-game hunting ( page 24).
Online Hunter Education Course:  Hunters 9 years of age or older can obtain a 
Hunter Education number by completing an online Hunter Education course. Online 
course options can be found at:  https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/education/hunter-
education/. A service fee may apply.
Instructor-Led Hunter Education Courses:  New Mexico Hunter Education 
numbers can also be obtained by completing a NMDOW, instructor-led Hunter 
Education course. NMDOW offers two types of in-person courses, a traditional 
course for students of all ages or a field-day course for students 10 years of age and 
older. Please note that students 10 years of age and younger must be accompanied by 
an adult to attend an in-person course. Before the first class session for all instructor-
led courses, students are required to complete a homework assignment. Homework 
may be completed online through a downloadable PDF file or a hardcopy manual. 
Hardcopy manuals are available at local NMDOW locations, after registration. 
Students must attend all class sessions and pass both a written exam and a firearm 
proficiency evaluation to be issued a New Mexico Hunter Education number. Courses 
are offered year-round and statewide. Early registration is encouraged to avoid 
missing a deadline to apply for a hunt. For complete information on course types, 
dates, locations, and requirements, as well as course content and homework, visit 
NMDOW at: https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/education/hunter-education.
Registration for Hunter and/or Bowhunter Education Courses
All students wishing to register for a Hunter and/or Bowhunter Education course 
must have their own NMDOW  account with a customer identification number (CIN). 
If you require assistance obtaining class information or a Hunter Education number 
please contact the New Mexico Hunter Education Program: 505-222-4731  or  
dgf-he@dgf.nm.gov . Bowhunter Education is not mandatory for bowhunters  
in New Mexico, but is highly recommended.
White Sands Missile Range and Fort Bliss
All hunters, regardless of age, on White Sands Missile Range (WSMR) and Fort
Bliss – including all of GMUs 19 and 28 and portions of GMU 34 – are required
to have proof of passing a state-certified Hunter Education course. Mentor-youth
hunters are not eligible .
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 24 ===
 24  
2026–2027
Mentor-Youth Hunter Program
First-time hunters 8–17 years of age who do not have a Hunter Education number 
may pass an online quiz and receive a mentor-youth number. This number enables 
a youth to hunt under the supervision of an adult mentor, and allows purchase of 
a Game-Hunting or Game-Hunting & Fishing License. Mentor-youth hunters 8–9 
years of age may hunt small game only. Mentor-youth hunters 10–17 years of age 
may apply for or purchase hunting licenses for deer, pronghorn, turkey, javelina and 
small game.
Youth participation in this program is a one-time opportunity and valid for two 
consecutive license years, beginning when a Game-Hunting License is initially 
purchased. When the mentor-youth hunter has completed the program and 
successfully passed a Hunter Education course, he or she can hunt any legal species 
independently with no age restriction.
Mentors must be either a parent, guardian or an adult with parental consent; be 
18 years of age or older; possess a valid Game-Hunting License; and possess an 
NMDOW-issued Mentor Certification Number or an NMDOW-approved Hunter 
Education Certification Number. Courses are available on the NMDOW's website. 
The mentor-youth hunter and mentor must be in unaided sight and audible distance 
from one another at all times while hunting.
For more information about the mentor-youth hunter program visit: 
https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/education/hunter-education/mentored-youth-hunter   
or call: 505-222-4731.
Volunteer Opportunities
Volunteers play an important role helping NMDOW provide programs and services 
across the state. From hunter and angler education to off-road vehicle safety and 
wildlife conservation, volunteers share time and talent to support initiatives that 
otherwise would not be possible.
If you enjoy hunting, fishing and New Mexico’s great outdoors, consider giving back 
to your community by becoming a volunteer with the NMDOW. For information 
about the variety of volunteer opportunities available, go to: https://wildlife.dgf.
nm.gov/home/contact/job-applicants/ .
Mentor-Youth Hunter
Hunter Education videos are 
available on the NMDOW’s  
YouTube channel at: 
youtube.com/user/
NMGameandFish/videos 
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 25 ===
  25 
2026–2027
Furbearer Education
Furbearer Education Requirements
Every person purchasing a Trapper License must complete a NMDOW-approved 
trapper education course before setting any trap or snare, or hunting any furbearer in 
New Mexico. Each person is required to complete the trapper education course only 
once in their lifetime; all courses are available free of charge. Proof of successful 
completion of a trapper education course in any other state will be accepted, but 
the New Mexico Furbearer Law and Species Identification Course must also be 
completed.
Courses must be provided or approved by NMDOW. These courses provide: 1) 
essential information needed to be a responsible and ethical trapper, 2) the laws 
governing furbearer trapping and hunting, and 3) information about furbearer 
species in New Mexico.
Please see the section below to determine which education course you will need to 
take. To enroll you must create or login to your account in the Online Licensing System 
https://onlinesales.wildlife.state.nm.us . After logging in, all course options are 
available by clicking "Trapper Education" in the main menu. For assistance logging 
into your account, contact the NMDOW Information Center: 1-888-248-6866 . If you 
have previously purchased a license in New Mexico, but are unable to log into your 
account, DO NOT CREATE A NEW ACCOUNT! Please call for assistance.
Which Course Are You Required To Take?
Trappers Who Have Never Taken a Trapper Education Course
If you will set traps and/or snares, and you have NEVER taken a trapper education  
course (in another state or with a national association), then choose the "New Mexico 
Trapper Education Course" online at https://onlinesales.wildlife.state.nm.us  to 
fulfill all of the education requirements for setting traps or snares for furbearers 
and for hunting furbearers in New Mexico. You will need your NMDOW  Customer 
Identification Number (CIN) to register for the course. Upon successful completion 
of this course, you will receive a Course Completion Certificate, your NMDOW  
account will automatically be updated and you will be able to purchase a license. 
Trappers Who Have Taken Trapper Education in Another State
If you will set traps and/or snares, and you HAVE PREVIOUSLY taken a trapper 
education course through a different venue (another state wildlife management 
agency or an NMDOW-approved, non-state entity), you are required to take the 
"New Mexico Furbearer Law and Species Identification Course" through your 
NMDOW account at https://onlinesales.wildlife.state.nm.us . To determine 
whether a trapper education course is approved, contact the NMDOW Trapper 
Education Program: 505-257-8701. The New Mexico Furbearer Law and Species 
Identification Course focuses specifically on the regulations that must be followed 
in New Mexico, and you must successfully pass a course quiz before a license can 
be purchased. After the quiz, you will be asked for the Trapper Education Number 
you received from the NMDOW-approved course you previously completed. If you 
do not have that number, please email Nicholas.Forman@dgf.nm.gov  to receive 
verification of your previous trapper education course.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 26 ===
 26  
2026–2027
Furbearer Education
Licenses and General Information: 1-888-248-6866
Hunters Calling and Hunting Furbearers ONLY (no trapping allowed)
If you only hunt furbearers (you will not be setting traps or snares), you are required 
to complete the Hunt-Only Course (New Mexico Furbearer Hunt Course) through 
your NMDOW account at https://onlinesales.wildlife.state.nm.us . This is an 
abbreviated version of the New Mexico Furbearer Law and Species Identification 
Course, which covers only the information applicable to hunting furbearers. You 
must successfully pass a course quiz before a license can be purchased. 
The Hunt-Only Course does not cover trapping and does not satisfy the requirements 
to set traps or snares in New Mexico. If you think you might trap at any time in the 
future, you should complete the New Mexico Trapper Education Course, which 
meets all furbearer hunting and trapping requirements. It is illegal to set any trap or 
snare without having completed an approved trapper education course. NMDOW  
encourages all furbearer hunters to take the full New Mexico Trapper Education 
Course.
Foothold trap placed  
flush with the surface  
of the ground. 
NMDOW photo.

=== page 27 ===
  27 
2026–2027
Draw License Refunds
The director of NMDOW  may grant a refund if the licensee: 1) is deceased; 2) 
has sustained a severe injury or suffered a life-threatening illness which prevents 
participation; 3) is deployed by the U.S. military prior to the start of the hunt which 
prohibits participation; or 4) a hunt is cancelled due to a natural disaster. Refund 
requests must be submitted in writing to the NMDOW  Santa Fe office  
or special.hunts@dgf.nm.gov  prior to the hunt start date. For further information,  
call 1-888-248-6866 . Written requests may not be withdrawn once received.
Draw License Donations
If ineligible for refund, a hunting license may be donated to NMDOW  to provide 
an opportunity for a youth 17 years of age or younger, a resident veteran or a 
resident first responder who has been qualified through a nonprofit organization that 
promotes hunting. Refunds are not offered for donated licenses. Qualifying nonprofit 
organizations must be approved by the New Mexico State Wildlife Commission .
License donation request forms are available online at https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/
hunting/applications-and-draw-information/hunting-license-donations/ .  Please 
submit your form to the NMDOW  Santa Fe office or special.hunts@dgf.nm.gov . 
For additional information call 1-888-248-6866 . Written requests may not be 
withdrawn once received. Donation requests received within three days of the 
hunt start date might not be processed.
Draw License Transfers
The director of NMDOW  may grant a transfer if the licensee: 1) is deceased; 
2) is deployed by the U.S. military prior to the start of the hunt which prohibits 
participation; or 3) under limited circumstances if the license holder can demonstrate 
that they are hospitalized or convalescing from a recent hospitalization due to a 
serious injury or illness. Transfer requests must be submitted in writing to the 
NMDOW Santa Fe office or special.hunts@dgf.nm.gov  prior to the hunt start date. 
For further information call 1-888-248-6866 . Written requests may not be withdrawn 
once received. Transfer requests received within three days of the hunt start date 
might not be processed, but may be refunded .
Transfers, Refunds & Donations
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 28 ===
 28 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Chronic Wasting Disease
Chronic Wasting Disease Rules Apply in Units 19, 28, 29 
and 34
It is unlawful to transport any deer or elk or their parts outside of these GMUs if they 
were taken from any chronic wasting disease (CWD) control area designated by the 
director of the NMDOW. The exceptions are:
• Meat that is cut and wrapped either privately or commercially.
•  Quarters or other portions of meat with no part of the head or spinal column attached.
•  Meat that has been boned out.
•  Hides with no heads attached.
•  Clean skull plates with antlers attached. Skull plate must be immersed in a bath of at least one 
part chlorine bleach and two parts water with all meat and tissue removed.
•  Antlers with no meat or tissue attached.
•  Upper canine teeth, also known as ivories.
•  Finished heads mounted by a taxidermist.
• By prior arrangement, a harvested deer or elk or their parts may be moved to an NMDOW 
office.
Whole animals or heads may be taken to a processor or taxidermist within the GMU 
where the animal was harvested but cannot be taken out of the GMU or state. You 
must keep proof of sex with all game species until you get the game to the place 
where it will be consumed or placed in cold storage.
Win an Elk or Oryx Incentive Authorization by Helping  
Test for Chronic Wasting Disease! 
To participate, bring your freshly harvested deer or elk head to any NMDOW office 
or field collection station where tissues can be collected for CWD testing. In Units 
19, 28, 29 and 34 hunters must present the head for testing within the unit where the 
animal was harvested. Hunters must deliver the unfrozen head within 48 hours of 
killing the animal to be eligible. Participating hunters who harvest an animal in any 
GMU may be selected by drawing to receive an elk or oryx incentive authorization. 
Incentive authorizations can be used by the recipient or by any individual of the 
recipient’s choice through sale, barter or gift. 
NMDOW photo
=== page 29 ===
  29 
2026–2027
It is unlawful to:
• Recklessly or carelessly handle a firearm.
• Hunt or trap while under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicants, including marijuana.
• Litter and/or pollute streams, lakes and other waters.
• Leave a fire unattended or improperly control fire.
• Hunt or trap protected species without a license and all applicable permits, tags, stamps or 
validations or fail to tag any big game or turkey.
• Hunt or trap protected species using licenses, tags, permits, stamps or validations belong -
ing to another individual, or take or attempt to take a protected species for another person, 
except as permitted when assisting a licensed mobility-impaired hunter (page 20).
• Kill more than one of the following: elk, pronghorn, Barbary sheep, bighorn sheep, ibex, 
javelina, oryx, bear or deer during any license year, except as permitted by rule. 
• Apply for, buy or use more than one license for any species per license year.
• Shine spotlights or other artificial lights into areas where big-game species or livestock may 
be present, while in possession of any sporting arm.
•  Take or attempt to take game species by baiting. An area is considered to be baited for 10 
days after the removal of the bait. It is also unlawful to take bear by the aid of scent.
• Use live protected species as decoys to take or attempt to take game species.
• Use electronically or mechanically recorded calling devices, except for cougars, bears, 
javelina, furbearers, nongame species and during the Light Goose Conservation Order.
•  Use tracer ammunition, full-metal jacketed bullets or fully automatic weapons.
• Park any motor vehicle or camp within 300 yards of any man-made water hole, water well 
or watering tank used by wildlife or domestic stock without the prior consent of the private 
landowner, private-land lessee, public-land lessee or public-land management agency.
•  Shoot at protected species or artificial wildlife from a motor vehicle.  
• Shoot at game on, from or across any paved, graded or maintained public road or within the 
fenced right-of-way of any paved, graded or maintained public road.
• Shoot at, pursue, harass, harry, drive or rally any protected species by any means, except 
while legally hunting.
•  Use motor-driven vehicles on roads closed under the Habitat Protection Act or other  
federal regulation.
• Hunt or shoot at any animal from an aircraft or drone or fly an aircraft in any manner that 
causes any non-domesticated animal to move from its place of rest or change its direction of 
travel.
• Make false statements when purchasing or applying for a license or alter any license issued 
by NMDOW.
• Hunt from an aircraft, use aircraft to signal locations of protected species to hunters, or 
harass game species with an aircraft; hunt protected species observed from aircraft within 
48 hours of observation; or hunt protected species the same day of air travel, except by com -
mercial airline or direct flight to a landing strip.
•  Discharge a firearm within 150 yards of a dwelling or building (not including abandoned or 
vacated buildings on public land) without the permission of the owner or lessee.
• Take any animal that is protected by law but not listed as a game species and/or any animal 
that is listed as an endangered or threatened species.
• Use any cellular, Wi-Fi or satellite camera for the purpose of hunting or scouting remotely 
for any big game animal. 
• Hunt any protected species outside of established season for that species.
• Exceed the daily bag limit or the legal possession limit of any small-game species.
• Hunt for game species outside of legal shooting hours.
• Hunt or trap on private land without written permission.
• To place a trap or snare on public land, see page 132.
General Rules
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 30 ===
 30 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
License Requirements and Fees: See page 12–17
Understanding Hunt Codes: The hunt code printed on your license indicates the 
species, legal sporting arms, dates, area, fee type and bag limit for the license issued.
For example: DER–1–101 
•  "DER" indicates a deer hunt.
•  "1" indicates any legal big-game sporting arm (2 = bow only; 3 = muzzleloader, crossbow or 
bow only).
•  "101" indicates an individual hunt for specific dates, area, fee type and bag limit.
This example (DER–1–101) found on page 55 is a deer hunt for any big-game sporting 
arm, standard fee, valid in GMU 2A from November 1-5 with a bag limit of one fork-
antlered deer (FAD).
Legal Sporting Arms 
Legal sporting arms for deer, elk, pronghorn, bighorn sheep, ibex, oryx, 
Barbary sheep and bear (big-game sporting arms): Any centerfire firearm at 
least .22 caliber or larger, any muzzle-loading firearm at least .45 caliber or larger, any 
shotgun .410 caliber or larger firing a single slug (including muzzle-loading shotguns), 
any bow or any crossbow. All firearms, except handguns, must be designed to be fired 
from the shoulder. Hunters must use only bullets designed to expand or fragment 
upon impact. Full metal jacket (FMJ) and tracer bullets are illegal. No fully automatic 
firearms may be used. Arrows and bolts must have broadheads (fixed or mechanical) 
with cutting edges. Sights on bows and crossbows may not project light (lighted pins 
are acceptable). No drugs may be used on arrows or bolts, and they cannot be driven 
by explosives, gunpowder or compressed air.
Legal sporting arms for cougar, javelina and furbearers: Any firearm, 
muzzleloader, compressed air gun, shotgun, bow or crossbow. All firearms, except 
handguns, must be designed to be fired from the shoulder. For cougar and javelina, 
compressed air guns must be .22 caliber or larger and shotguns must fire a single slug 
or #4 buckshot or larger. Arrows and bolts must have broadheads (fixed or mechanical) 
with cutting edges. Sights on bows and crossbows may not project light. No drugs 
may be used on arrows or bolts, and they cannot be driven by explosives, gunpowder 
or compressed air.
Legal sporting arms for turkey: Any shotgun firing shot, bow and crossbow.  
Arrows and bolts must have broadheads (fixed or mechanical) with cutting edges. 
Sights on bows and crossbows may not project light. No drugs may be used on arrows 
or bolts, and they cannot be driven by explosives, gunpowder or compressed air.
Legal sporting arms for upland game: Quail and pheasant may be taken with 
shotguns and muzzle-loading shotguns firing shot, bows, and crossbows. Eurasian 
collared-dove, grouse and squirrels may be taken with shotguns firing shot, muzzle-
loading shotguns, rim-fire and muzzle-loading firearms, bows, crossbows and 
compressed air guns firing a pellet .177 or larger.
General Rules
=== page 31 ===
  31 
2026–2027
Legal sporting arms for migratory game birds:   Migratory game birds may 
be taken with a shotgun fired from the shoulder, provided it is no larger than 10-gauge 
and is not capable of holding more than three shells. Migratory game birds also may 
be taken with muzzle-loading shotguns firing shot, bow and arrows, and crossbow and 
bolts.
Bow only: Any compound, long or recurve bow. Draw locks are illegal. Arrows 
must have broadheads (fixed or mechanical) with cutting edges. Sights on bows may 
not project light (lighted pins are acceptable). No drugs may be used on an arrow, and 
arrows cannot be driven by explosives, gunpowder or compressed air. Crossbow use 
is allowed only with reasonable accommodation permit or mobility impaired card.
Muzzleloader, crossbow or bow only: Hunters may use any legal 
muzzleloader with open, "iron" or peep sights, any legal bow or any legal crossbow 
during regular muzzleloader hunts (see also restricted muzzleloader). Scopes, red 
dots or other similar sights are not allowed on muzzleloaders during a muzzleloader 
hunt. See definition of muzzleloader on page 161. Sabots and in-line ignition may be 
used with muzzleloaders except during restricted muzzleloader deer hunts. No drugs 
may be used on arrows or bolts, and arrows and bolts (see arrow or bolt definition on 
page 158) cannot be driven by explosives, gunpowder or compressed air. Airbows 
and all guns firing arrows or bolts are illegal. 
Restricted Muzzleloader for deer: Only a muzzle-loading rifle using open sights, 
black powder or equivalent propellant and firing a full-bore-diameter bullet or patched 
round ball is legal. The use of in-line ignition, scopes and smokeless powder are 
prohibited. Bows and crossbows are legal during restricted muzzleloader deer hunts.
Mandatory Harvest Reporting: Deadlines see Page 10. 
Harvest reporting is mandatory for all Barbary sheep, deer, elk, ibex, javelina, oryx, 
pronghorn, turkey and trapper license holders, whether or not a hunt or harvest 
occurred. Harvest reports can be submitted online or by telephone. Failure to report by 
the deadline(s) will result in rejection of all draw applications. Remember to keep your 
confirmation number!
One License per Species
It is illegal to apply for, buy or use more than one license for any game species during 
any license year, except when permitted by rule.
Proof of Species, Sex and Bag Limit
Hunters must keep proof of sex with all game species (except javelina) until the 
game has been transported where it will be consumed or stored. The antlers or horns 
must remain attached to the skull or skull plate of all male Barbary sheep, bighorn 
sheep, deer, elk, ibex, oryx or pronghorn. Immature males must be accompanied 
by the scalp and both ears. Females must be accompanied by either the scalp and 
both ears or the external genitalia naturally attached to one quarter. The external 
genitalia of any bear or cougar must remain naturally attached to the hide and 
be readily visible until the hide has been inspected and pelt tagged by a NMDOW 
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 32 ===
 32 
2026–2027
representative. The beard must remain with the carcass when the bag limit is a 
bearded turkey. The head or leg of each pheasant, one foot of each quail and one 
fully feathered wing of each migratory game bird, (dove and band-tailed pigeons are 
exempt) must remain attached to the bird until it is at a residence, taxidermist, meat 
processing facility or place of final cold storage.
Possession, Donation or Sale of Game
It is unlawful to possess or transport any live game animal (including birds) or any 
protected species or parts thereof without a valid license, a properly notched carcass 
tag, handwritten e-tag if applicable or other evidence the game has been taken 
legally. Carcasses, meat and internal organs of game mammals and game birds may 
not be sold or bartered but can be donated. Only the skins, heads, antlers, horns, 
rendered fat, teeth or claws of legally taken or possessed protected species, any parts 
of furbearers, and the feathers of non-migratory game birds may be bartered or sold. 
Any person giving items to another person must supply the recipient with a written 
description which states: the parts (skin, head, antlers, horns, claws, feathers, etc.) 
and/or the kind and number of game; the date when and county where game was 
taken; the conveyor’s name, address and hunting license number used to take the 
game; and the date and place of the transaction or donation. A sample certificate is 
provided on page 157 and downloadable at https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/hunting/ . 
It is unlawful to possess the head, horns or attached antlers of any big-game species 
found in the field without a receipt from NMDOW.
Storage
For big game and turkey, a properly notched carcass tag or handwritten E-Tag must 
remain with the meat, and for furbearers, upland game and migratory game birds, a 
license or possession certificate must remain with the meat. Possession and storage 
is authorized for one year from the date of kill. To store or possess meat after this 
date, individuals must have a storage permit from NMDOW. Bear and cougar carcass 
tags authorize possession of the animal for five days or until pelt tagged, whichever 
occurs first. 
Trophies taken to a taxidermist or carcasses taken to a meat processor must be 
accompanied by a properly notched carcass tag and antler/horn tag (if applicable), a 
handwritten E-Tag, or a possession (donation) certificate. Keep your tags!
Use of Dogs
Dogs may be used to hunt upland game, waterfowl, furbearers, bear and cougar only. 
Dogs may not be used to hunt any other game species. Certain exceptions apply (see 
specific species sections). When dogs are used to hunt bear or cougar, the licensed 
hunter must be present continuously once any dog is released. Leashed dogs may be 
used to locate wounded or dead big game. If dogs are used to locate wounded or dead 
big game, hunters must keep the dog(s) on a leash, and no more than two dogs 
may be used at a time.
General Rules
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 33 ===
  33 
2026–2027
Blaze Orange
Hunters on military reservations must wear a minimum of 144 square inches of blaze 
orange. Ft. Bliss, including McGregor Range (GMU 28), requires a blaze orange vest. 
Hunters participating in any firearm elk hunt on Valles Caldera National Preserve 
must wear a minimum of 244 square inches of blaze orange. Thoug h not required 
elsewhere by law, NMDOW strongly encourages hunters to wear blaze orange.
Transportation of Horses
All horses being transported must be inspected by a local livestock inspector. Non-
residents with horses must have proof of ownership and health papers. For further 
information contact the New Mexico Livestock Board: 505-841-6161.
Nongame Hunters
Nongame species include prairie dogs, ground squirrels, Himalayan tahr, porcupine, 
rabbits, coyotes and skunks. Nongame hunting is not permitted on wildlife 
management areas (WMAs), except Water Canyon WMA from Jan. 1 to March 31, 
2026, and Prairie Chicken Areas from Nov. 1 - March 15, 2027.  
Feral Hogs
Feral hogs are an unprotected species that can damage habitat, contaminate water 
and compete with native wildlife. Because of the negative impact this non-native 
intruder causes, anyone may hunt feral hogs year-round without a license. Basic 
hunting rules apply—such as obtaining permission if hunting on private land. 
Hunting with the aid of an artificial light and discharging of firearms within 150 
yards of an occupied dwelling is illegal. Feral hogs should not be confused with 
javelina, which look similar but are a protected game sp ecies. Javelina are smaller 
than feral hogs and do not have a tail. Javelina also have a white stripe of hair near the 
shoulders and neck, giving them the common name collared peccary. Fo r information 
about where to hunt feral hogs contact the USDA: 505-346-2640 .
Skulls Are State Property
Skulls are both fascinating and valuable. When found in the field, the skulls of all 
protected species remain the property of New Mexico—unless from an animal 
legally taken by a licensed hunter during an approved hunting season. This rule 
applies to all individuals, whether hunting or not. This important law enables 
conservation officers to better regulate the illegal taking of big-game animals solely 
for the head or trophy.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Feral hog Javelina
=== page 34 ===
 34  
2026–2027
Although possession of shed antlers is legal (page 12), possession of antlers attached 
to a skull found in the field is not. Antlered skulls may be available for purchase from 
NMDOW. If purchased, the receipt must be retained by the owner. Should probable 
cause suggest an animal was killed or is possessed unlawfully, conservation officers 
may confiscate such skulls. If you find the skull of a protected animal, leave it where it 
is found and contact a NMDOW conservation officer.
Vehicle Use: Driving Off-Road or on a Closed Road 
1. During the seasons established for any protected species, it is unlawful to drive or ride in a 
motor vehicle which is driven off an established road on public land or on a closed road on 
public land when the vehicle bears a licensed hunter, angler or trapper.
2. During the seasons established for any protected species, it is unlawful to drive or ride in a  
motor vehicle which is driven off an established road on private land, without written per-
mission from the landowner, when the vehicle bears a licensed hunter, angler or trapper.
3. It is unlawful to drive or ride in a motor vehicle which is being driven off an established road 
or on a closed road when gathering or searching for shed antlers on public land.
4. EXCEPTION: Snowmobiles may be driven off established roads and lawfully taken game 
may be retrieved in areas not closed to vehicular traffic.
5. Public land as used in this section shall mean any federally owned or managed property; any 
state-owned or managed property; any private property which is part of a unitization hunting 
agreement, ranch-wide agreement or unit-wide agreement for the species being hunted; any 
private property NMDOW has paid for public access for the species being hunted; or any 
New Mexico State Wildlife Commission-owned or managed property.
Established Road Means:
1. A road, built or maintained by equipment, which shows no evidence of ever being closed to 
vehicular traffic by such means as berms, ripping, scarification, reseeding, fencing, gates, 
barricades or posted closures;
2. A two-track road which shows use prior to hunting seasons for other purposes such as rec-
reation, mining, logging, and ranching and which shows no evidence of ever being closed to 
vehicular traffic by such means as berms, ripping, scarification, reseeding, fencing, gates,  
barricades or posted closures.
Harassment of Legal Hunters, Anglers and Trappers
New Mexico Law (Chapter 17–2–7.1, NMSA 1978) prohibits interference with 
another person who is lawfully hunting, trapping or fishing in an area where those 
activities are permitted. The first offense is a petty misdemeanor; the second offense 
is a misdemeanor.
If a person committing interference possesses a license, certificate or permit issued 
to him/her by the New Mexico State Wildlife Commission, the license, certificate or 
permit will be subject to revocation.
Interference means:
1.  Intentionally locating one’s person where human presence may affect the behavior of a game 
animal, bird or fish, where human presence may interfere with the taking or killing of a game 
animal, bird or fish, and/or where human presence may interfere with another who is lawfully 
hunting, trapping or fishing.
2. Intentionally creating a visual, auditory, olfactory or physical stimulus to affect the behavior 
of a game animal, bird or fish and interfere with another person who is lawfully hunting, fish-
ing or trapping.
General Rules
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 35 ===
  35 
2026–2027
3. Intentionally altering, removing or affecting the placement or condition of personal property 
used for taking a game animal, bird or fish.
If you witness any violation, please document the vehicle description, license plate 
number or aircraft tail number and contact Operation Game Thief: 1-800-432-4263 .
Waste of Game
Anyone who takes a Barbary sheep, bighorn sheep, deer, elk, ibex, oryx, pronghorn, 
turkey, migratory game bird or upland game must transport the edible portions for 
human consumption from the field. The edible portions of game animals include 
all four quarters, backstraps, tenderloins and the neck meat. The edible portions of 
turkey include the breast, legs and thigh meat. Anyone who wounds or may have 
wounded any big-game species must go to the place where the animal sustained the 
wound or may have sustained the wound and make a reasonable attempt to track and 
kill the animal. This requirement does not authorize trespass on private land. Call 
1-800-432-4263  for assistance recovering a wounded animal that enters private land.
Anyone who takes or kills a Barbary sheep, bighorn sheep, deer, elk, ibex, oryx, 
pronghorn or turkey outside of the legal season or without a valid license, which 
taking or killing results in waste of the animal, is guilty of a fourth-degree felony.  
Waste of the animal consists of removing from the animal only the head, antlers 
or horns or abandoning any of the four quarters, backstraps or tenderloins of the 
carcass. A violation of the provisions of this paragraph is intended to be separate 
from and cumulative to any other violation of Chapter 17 NMSA 1978. 
License Privileges Can Be Revoked
Points are assessed against privileges based on the type of violation committed. Any 
person accumulating 20 points or more within any consecutive three-year period 
shall be considered for revocation of the following: all hunting, fishing and trapping 
license privileges; any guiding and outfitting registration; landowner authorizations; 
and/or any permit or certificate issued under Chapter 17, NMSA 1978 and its 
implementing rules.
New Mexico is a member of the Interstate Wildlife Violator Compact (IWVC) and 
may recognize the suspension or revocation of license privileges of any person listed 
as a wildlife violator by another participating state. New Mexico will notify IWVC of 
all revocations, and other states may reciprocate New Mexico's revocations. Contact 
NMDOW Field Operations for specific information at: 505-476-8065 .
Federal Law
Transporting illegally taken game across state lines is a violation of the federal Lacey 
Act, and may be classified as a felony.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 36 ===
 36  
2026–2027
General Rules
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Parental Responsibility Act
The Parental Responsibility Act requires the New Mexico State Wildlife 
Commission to suspend the recreational and professional licenses of anyone who 
does not comply with court-ordered child support obligations. Hunting and fishing 
privileges are suspended until court-ordered child support payments are up-to-date 
and a $25 reinstatement fee has been paid. For more information, please contact 
NMDOW Field Operations: 505-476-8065 .
Forfeitures
Sporting arms may be seized and forfeited if used in the following crimes: possession 
or transportation of big game during closed season, killing big game during closed 
season, spotlighting or hunting with the aid of artificial light or exceeding the bag 
limit on any big game species during open season.  Any motor vehicle may be seized 
and forfeited if used while spotlighting or hunting with the aid of artificial light. 
All shed antlers collected in violation of any New Mexico State Wildlife 
Commission, state or federal land closure, in violation of section 30–14–1 NMSA 
1978 or in violation of any of the provisions of Chapter 17 or State Wildlife 
Commission rule remain property of the State of New Mexico and shall be seized.
Criminal Penalties
Poachers may incur criminal penalties, including:
• First offense: Up to $1,000 in fines and one year in jail.
• Second offense: Up to $4,000 in fines and one year in jail.
• Third offense: Up to $6,000 in fines, mandatory 90 days in jail and up to one year 
in jail.
• Felony waste of game: Up to $5,000 in fines and 18 months in prison.
Substantial Civil Assessments for Poaching
To recover the loss of the state's wildlife, the New Mexico State Wildlife 
Commission has adopted substantial civil assessments for the illegal taking of trophy 
game animals.
The assessments are:
Elk $10,000* Ibex $10,000* Barbary sheep $6,000*
Deer $10,000* Oryx $10,000* Turkey $500*
Bighorn sheep $10,000* Pronghorn $8,000* Trout $150*
* Higher dollar amounts may be sought in certain cases.
=== page 37 ===
  37  
2026–2027
All Big-Game and Turkey Harvests Must Be Tagged 
1. Immediately after harvesting any big-game animal or turkey, the carcass tag must be notched. The 
carcass tag must be attached to the kill before leaving the kill site. Instructions for notching and 
attaching are listed below and are provided on the reverse side of the tag.
2. Antlered or horned big game require an antler/horn tag be attached in addition to a carcass tag. 
Instructions for attaching are listed below and provided on the reverse side of the tag.
3.  Any big-game or turkey kill left unattended in the field, in a vehicle or in camp must have  
a properly notched carcass tag and antler/horn tag (if applicable) attached.
 It is unlawful to possess any big-game species or turkey in the field without a properly notched 
carcass tag or handwritten E-Tag.
4.  Bear and cougar must be both carcass tagged and pelt tagged. Bear and cougar must be presented 
for pelt tagging within five days after harvest (pages 123, 129). 
5. The carcass tag or handwritten E-Tag authorizes possession of the big-game animal or turkey for 
one year from date of kill. Bear and cougar carcass tags authorize possession of the animal for five 
days or until pelt tagged, whichever occurs first. Keep your tags!
Tagging Instructions
1. Do not remove backing on the carcass tag until 
you are ready to tag.
2. Upon killing your big-game animal or turkey, 
immediately and completely notch the month and 
day of kill on the carcass tag and then attach to 
the hock tendon of the animal or above the leg spur of the turkey (see illustrations above) prior to 
moving the big-game animal or turkey from the kill site. For bear and cougar the carcass tag may be 
wrapped around a hind leg above the foot if skinned.
3. Do not leave any backing material on the tag. Wrap the tag on carcass as shown, matching the ends 
together and pressing adhesive sides together evenly and tightly. Leave entire face of tag visible and 
readable. Do not overlap tag ends or cover any of the print.
4. Tags must remain attached until the big-game animal or turkey arrives at a taxidermist, meat process-
ing facility or place of final storage (e.g. your home), or if required, until it is inspected, documented 
or pelt tagged by a NMDOW official. If multiple trips are required to transport the animal from the 
field, NMDOW recommends the tagged portion be transported first.
5. If a big-game animal is boned out or when a javelina is killed and nothing is removed or only the skull 
is taken, fold and adhere the carcass tag to itself leaving the entire face of the carcass tag visible. The 
adhered carcass tag must physically remain with parts of the animal that are removed and possessed.
Antlered and Horned Game Tag Instructions
When ready to tag, detach antler tag from backing. Attach the antler/horn tag to the 
main beam of the antler or horn, as close to the base as possible, where it will not 
slide off. Leave entire face of tag visible and readable . 
E-Tag Instructions
If the E-Tag option is chosen, hunters must be able to show their license in the NM 
E-Tag app on their smartphone. Upon harvesting a big-game animal or turkey, 
hunters must click the Tag My Animal link in the app to receive their E-Tag number 
and other required information. The E-Tag number, CIN and date and time of kill 
must be hand written on a durable material (e.g. duct tape or flagging ribbon) in 
permanent ink and then attached to the animal (see Tagging Instructions , above). 
This procedure must be repeated for antlered/horned game as described above.
Carcass Tag Instructions
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Carcass tag       Turkey tag         Antler tag
=== page 38 ===
 38 
2026–2027
Criminal Trespass
Criminal Trespass 30–14–1 NMSA 1978
A. Criminal trespass consists of knowingly entering or remaining upon posted private property without 
possessing written permission from the owner or person in control of the land. The provisions of 
this subsection do not apply if: 1) the owner or person in control of the land has entered into an 
agreement with NMDOW granting access to the land to the general public for the purpose of taking 
any game animals, birds or fish by hunting or fishing; or 2) a person is in possession of a landowner 
license given to him by the owner or person in control of the land that grants access to that particu-
lar private land for the purpose of taking any game animals, birds or fish by hunting or fishing.
B. Criminal trespass also consists of knowingly entering or remaining upon the unposted lands of 
another, knowing that such consent to enter or remain is denied or withdrawn by the owner or 
occupant thereof. Notice of no consent to enter shall be deemed sufficient notice to the public and 
evidence to the courts by the posting of the property at all vehicular access entry ways.
C.  Criminal trespass also consists of knowingly entering or remaining upon lands owned, operated or 
controlled by the state or any of its political subdivisions, knowing that consent to enter or remain is 
denied or withdrawn by the custodian thereof.
D.  Any person who enters upon the lands of another without prior permission and injures, damages or 
destroys any part of the realty or its improvements, including buildings, structures, trees, shrubs or 
other natural features, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be liable to the owner, lessee or person 
in lawful possession for civil damages in an amount equal to double the value of the damage to the 
property injured or destroyed.
E.  Whoever commits criminal trespass is guilty of a misdemeanor. Additionally, any person who 
violates the provisions of Subsection A, B or C of this section, when in connection with hunting, 
fishing or trapping activity, shall have their hunting or fishing license revoked by the Wildlife 
Commission for a period of not less than three years, pursuant to the provisions of Section 17–3–34 
NMSA 1978.
F.  Whoever knowingly removes, tampers with or destroys any "no trespass" sign is guilty of a petty 
misdemeanor; except when the damage to the sign amounts to more than one thousand dollars 
($1,000), is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to imprisonment in the county jail for a 
definite term less than one year or a fine not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or to both 
such imprisonment and fine in the discretion of the judge.
Posting Requirements for Trespass 30–14–6 NMSA 1978
A.  The owner, lessee or person lawfully in possession of real property in New Mexico, except property 
owned by the state or federal government, desiring to prevent trespass or entry onto the real prop-
erty shall post notices parallel to and along the exterior boundaries of the property to be posted, at 
each roadway or other way of access in conspicuous places, and if the property is not fenced, such 
notices shall be posted every 500 feet along the exterior boundaries of such land.   
B.  The notices posted shall prohibit all people from trespassing or entering upon the property, without 
permission of the owner, lessee, person in lawful possession or his/her agent. The notices shall: 
1) be printed legibly in English;  2) be at least 144 square inches in size; 3) contain the name and 
address of the person under whose authority the property is posted or the name and address of the 
person who is authorized to grant permission to enter the property; 4) be placed at each roadway or 
apparent way of access onto the property, in addition to the posting of the boundaries; and 5) where 
applicable, state any specific prohibition that the posting is directed against, such as "no trespass-
ing," "no hunting," "no fishing," "no digging" or any other specific prohibition.
C.  Any person who posts public lands contrary to state or federal law or regulation is guilty of a petty 
misdemeanor.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 39 ===
  39  
2026–2027
Hunting or Trapping on Private Property  
without Written Permission
A. It is unlawful to knowingly enter upon any private property to hunt, capture, take, attempt to take, 
or kill any game animal, furbearer, game bird, or game fish without possessing written permission 
from the landowner or person in control of the land or trespass rights unless otherwise permitted in 
rule or statute.
B. Any game animal, furbearer or game bird taken in violation of this section or section 30–14–1 
NMSA 1978 is unlawfully killed and shall be subject to seizure.
C. Exception: Written permission is not required on any property which is participating in a unitiza-
tion, receives compensation for allowing public access, receives unit-wide authorizations, or has 
agreed to a ranch-wide agreement when species being harvested is part of any of these agreements.
Written Permission shall mean a document (which may include a valid hunting, 
trapping or fishing license) that asserts the holder has permission from the private 
landowner or their designee to hunt, fish, trap or drive off road on the landowner’s 
property. The information on the document must be verifiable and include the name 
of the person(s) receiving permission, activity permitted, property’s location and 
name (if applicable), name of person granting permission, date and length of time 
the permission is granted, and phone number or e-mail of the person granting the 
permission. Licenses issued for private land which have the ranch name printed 
on them constitute written permission for that property and no other permission is 
required except for Private-Land Elk Licenses in the secondary management zone 
pursuant to 19.30.5 and 19.31.14 NMAC. Visit https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/download/
written-permission-to-hunt-private-land/  to download the form or detach the form 
below.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Criminal Trespass
At the New Mexico  
Department of Wildlife, we ...
issued
5,815
total citations
engaged in
78,536
total field contacts
enforced the law
46,822
total hours
this past year
LANDOWNER'S COPY SPORTSPERSON'S COPY
PERMISSION GRANTED TO: 
 Signature
FROM:       TO: 
 Dates of access
SIGNED:        DATE: 
 Landowner
I agree to conduct myself as 
a true sportsperson and to 
remember that hunting on 
private property is a privilege 
to be earned and not a right.
SIGNED: 
 Sportsperson
DATE: 
=== page 40 ===
 40 
2026–2027
Operation Game Thief
Poaching Harms Everyone
Poachers are thieves stealing New Mexico’s wildlife which is harmful to hunters, 
anglers and outdoor enthusiasts alike. Operation Game Thief (OGT) is a silent 
witness program to help stop illegal poaching, trespassing and wildlife trafficking by 
offering rewards for information leading to the arrest of poachers. 
Turn Tips into Cash! 
Funded by donations from individuals and organizations and not from taxes or 
license fees, rewards include: $750 for cases involving elk or bighorn sheep; $500 
for cases involving deer or oryx; $350 for cases involving pronghorn; $250 for cases 
involving turkey, bear, cougar, javelina, ibex, Barbary sheep, endangered species, 
small game, fish, raptors and furbearers; and $50 for cases where a warning citation 
is issued. OGT’s toll-free hotline: 1-800-432-4263  is available 24/7/365. Wildlife 
violations and trespassing also can be reported online at: https://onlinesales.
wildlife.state.nm.us/public/ogt .
Operation Game Thief Needs Your Support
Individuals or organizations concerned about poaching and its 
impact on New Mexico’s wildlife can send tax-deductible donations 
to Operation Game Thief or call: 1-800-432-4263 . Donations can 
be mailed to: OGT, One Wildlife Way, Santa Fe, NM 87507 . All 
donations received are used solely to pay rewards and promote the 
program.
Rewards Offered for Reporting Illegal  
Vehicle Use Off-Road and Dumping
Driving any vehicle off-road is illegal outside of designated areas 
and can degrade wildlife habitat and negatively impact the quality 
of hunting and angling opportunities. Illegal dumping can also harm 
To report violations call: 1-800-432-4263
SCAN FOR 
OGT FORM
SCAN FOR 
OFFICER MAP 
AND CONTACTS
PERMISSION GRANTED TO: 
ADDRESS:      
CITY: 
PHONE: 
EMAIL: 
DATES OF ACCESS
  TO  
New Mexico Landowner-Sportsperson
WRITTEN PERMISSION FORM
LANDOWNER'S COPY
Written permission shall mean a document (which may include a valid hunting, trapping or 
fishing license) that asserts the holder has permission from the private landowner or their 
designee to hunt, fish, trap or drive off road on the landowner’s property.
SPORTSPERSON'S COPY
LANDOWNER'S NAME: 
FARM/RANCH NAME:  
ADDRESS:  
CITY:  PHONE: 
DATES OF ACCESS:   TO  
I agree to conduct myself as a true sportsperson and  
to remember that hunting on private property is a privilege  
to be earned and not a right.
=== page 41 ===
  41  
2026–2027
wildlife and ruin the outdoor experience for everyone. The New Mexico Chapter 
of Backcountry Hunters and Anglers offers rewards of up to $500 for information 
leading to the conviction of violators in these cases. 
For information about how to report illegal vehicle use off-road or illegal dumping, 
visit online: www.backcountryhunters.org/new_mexico  or contact your local 
NMDOW officer.
Know the Laws, Operate Safely and Enjoy!
New Mexico's off-highway vehicle (OHV) laws are to ensure safe and responsible 
use of OHVs to protect all citizens. OHVs include all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), 
recreational off-highway vehicles (ROVs), off-highway motorcycles and 
snowmobiles. All OHVs must be registered or properly permitted and equipped with 
a Forest Service-approved spark arrestor. Non-residents may register an OHV in 
their home state or can purchase a New Mexico non-resident permit through their 
online account at https://onlinesales.wildlife.state.nm.us/ .
All operators and passengers younger than 18 years of age must wear a Department 
of Transportation (DOT) approved helmet and goggles or safety glasses. Operators 
younger than 18 years of age must carry proof of successful completion of an OHV 
safety training. Every rider is responsible for knowing and obeying the laws. Before 
riding on public land, visit www.RideNM.dgf.nm.gov.
New Mexico OHV Code of Ethics
• Learn about the area where you are planning to ride. Before you ride, contact public land 
managers or private property owners to understand area restrictions and ask for permission. 
Obtain maps of the area(s) and remain on roads, trails and/or areas designated for OHV use.
• Be courteous on the trail. Allow right-of-way to hikers and horseback riders. If you encounter 
horses pull off the trail on the low side, stop your engine, remove your helmet and speak to 
the rider. Wait until all horses have passed 50 feet beyond your location before restarting your 
engine.
• Minimize the OHV's impact on other hunters and anglers using the trail. Respect seasonal 
closures. Avoid operation during peak hunting hours. If retrieving game with an OHV , oper-
ate at midday to minimize disturbance to others. Cross streams where designated and at a 
90-degree angle wherever possible.
• Leave gates and fences as you found them, and remember it’s unlawful to travel or hunt on 
private property without the owner’s permission.
• Leave areas cleaner than you found them. A plastic trash bag and bungee cords can be helpful 
to remove trash.
• Obey trail markers and closure signs. If it’s posted closed, stay out!
• Keep your OHV quiet. Excessive sound stresses wildlife and annoys property owners and 
other recreational users. It also contributes to your own riding fatigue. Less sound allows you 
to ride more comfortably and others to enjoy their outdoor experience.
• Approach livestock or wildlife on the trail slowly. Sometimes range cattle will pass the af-
ternoon under shade trees along the trail. If you startle them, they may run directly into your 
path. Give them time to react; allow as wide a berth as possible. Remember, it is unlawful to 
pursue or harass livestock.
• Never mix riding with alcohol or drugs. It’s illegal, and it's dangerous.
• Familiarize yourself with New Mexico’s laws and requirements for OHV use by visiting: 
www.RideNM.dgf.nm.gov  or calling: 505-222-4728 .
Off-Highway Vehicles
Registration and information: www.RideNM.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 42 ===
 42 
2026–2027 42 
Management Hunts
Population Management Hunts
Hunters wishing to be considered for population management hunts for Barbary 
sheep, bighorn sheep, deer, elk, ibex, javelina, oryx or pronghorn must select the 
fifth-choice option on their draw application for the appropriate species . 
Hunters cannot be added to the list after the public draw deadline. Applications must 
be completed online or by telephone by March 18 before 5 p.m. 
Applicants must apply for at least one regular draw hunt choice to be eligible for the 
population management hunt for the same species. By choosing this option, hunters 
are indicating their willingness, if unsuccessful in drawing their first, second, third 
or fourth choice, to be contacted by NMDOW  if a population management hunt is 
scheduled for that species.
If a population management hunt is scheduled, a NMDOW  official will contact the 
hunter to notify him/her of the hunt areas, dates, bag limit, allowable sporting arms 
and any other special restrictions. The hunter will be asked to accept or decline a 
hunt. If the hunter accepts the hunt, they must purchase the license online or by 
phone. If the hunter declines, the next hunter in sequence will be contacted. Bag 
limits for population management hunts will be primarily female animals, since 
these hunts are intended to reduce populations in specific areas.
Choosing a population management hunt option is not a guarantee the applicant will 
be contacted for a hunt. Population management hunters must file a harvest report.
White Sands Missile Range ( WSMR): To be eligible for population management 
hunts on WSMR, applicants must enter a hunt authorization code from an approved 
2026 WSMR Security Sponsor (see page 118). Leave the WSMR Population 
Management Hunt Authorization Code box unchecked if you do not have an 
authorization code .
Population Management Hunt Fees 
If unsuccessful for the first, second, third or fourth choice , applicants will be 
refunded the license fee. If a hunter is contacted and accepts a fifth-choice hunt, she/
he will be required to purchase the appropriate license(s) with tags .
White Sands Missile Range ($185), Ft. Bliss ($100) and Jornada Experimental 
Range ($150) each charge an access fee to all oryx hunters. Other federal agencies 
may charge access fees. Choosing the oryx population management hunt implies 
acceptance of additional fees should a hunter be called for one of these hunts. 
Population management hunters must file a harvest report and may be required to 
obtain a carcass tag in person at a license vendor or NMDOW  office.
Avoid Late Fees: Harvest Reporting for Late-Season Management Hunts
Population management license holders for deer, elk, pronghorn or turkey whose 
hunts end after January 31 must submit a harvest report on or before April 7 
to maintain draw eligibility. NMDOW recommends reporting by telephone at: 
1-888-248-6866  to avoid late fees.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 43 ===
  43 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Enhancement Hunts
NMDOW issues special hunting permits by partnering with non-profit conservation 
organizations who conduct auctions and raffles to raise funds for wildlife 
management. Authorizations may be used either by the recipient or any individual 
of the recipient’s choice through sale, barter or gift. These are not once-in-a-lifetime 
hunts. More information can be found on NMDOW’s website: https://wildlife.dgf.
nm.gov/hunting/applications-and-draw-information/enhancement-hunts/
BIG GAME PACKAGES: Two big game enhancement packages, consisting of one 
authorization each for  deer, elk, ibex, oryx and pronghorn, will be auctioned. 
The season dates are: Sept. 1, 2026–Jan. 31, 2027, for deer and elk; April 1, 
2026–March 31, 2027, for ibex and oryx (for oryx hunts, WSMR access must be 
prearranged); and Aug. 1–Nov. 1, 2026, for pronghorn.
BIGHORN SHEEP: Two Rocky Mountain bighorn and two desert bighorn sheep 
authorizations will be available, one via auction and one via raffle for each 
species. The season dates are: Aug. 1–Dec. 31, 2026, except in GMU 53 (Wheeler 
Peak), which is closed Aug. 16–31, 2026.
DEER AND ELK: Two fork-antlered deer and two mature bull elk authorizations 
will be available, one via auction and one via raffle for each species. The season 
dates are Sept. 1, 2026–Jan. 31, 2027.
GOULD’S TURKEY: Two bearded Gould’s turkey authorizations will be available, 
one via auction and one via raffle. The season dates are any consecutive 30 days 
of the hunter’s choosing between April 1 and May 31 each year.
Premium Statewide Deer and Elk Hunts
NMDOW premium deer and elk hunts are in honor of two NMDOW  employees, 
Austin Roberts and Ocie Gray, who were killed in a January 1960 plane crash while 
delivering hay to starving pronghorn on the snow-covered plains outside of Las 
Vegas. These hunts provide the public an affordable chance at a high quality hunting 
experience. The hunt codes are DER–1–700 and ELK–1–700 and allow hunting with 
any big-game sporting arm in any unit statewide, including NMDOW ’s wildlife 
management areas and private land with written permission, anytime between Sept. 
1, 2026 and Jan. 31, 2027. The hunts are available through the draw and are subject to 
quota (non-resident and outfitted applicants are extremely unlikely to draw).
Governor's Hunts
Special licenses for some big game species may be auctioned upon authorization 
from the governor. Auction winners must select an existing hunt code that they are 
eligible to participate in and will have the option to add additional days to their hunt. 
If a hunt code on military property is selected, coordination with the military is 
required.
Special Hunting Opportunities
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 44 ===
 44  
2026–2027
Federal Lands
Access to Public Lands
There are approximately nine million acres of national forest and 13 million acres 
of BLM lands in New Mexico. NMDOW recommends contacting the appropriate 
land management agency prior to hunting. Many public lands in New Mexico are 
interspersed with privately owned property and private landowners have the right to 
control the use of their private lands. Where no public access exists, sportsmen/women 
must obtain written permission from the landowner or leaseholder to cross private 
land for access to public land. It is unlawful for anyone to post or restrict lawful use of 
public land. Trapping is prohibited on all public lands (see page 132-134 for details and 
exceptions).
National Parks and Monuments
National parks and national monuments are closed to hunting, except the following 
BLM managed national monuments:
Rio Grande Del Norte National Monument . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 575-751-4899
Prehistoric Trackways National Monument and Organ Mountains– 
Desert Peaks National Monument  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 575-525-4300
Valles Caldera National Preserve
All of unit 6B is closed to hunting and trapping, except elk and turkey draw hunts. 
All hunters and participants in any firearm hunt on Valles Caldera National Preserve 
(VCNP), except turkey hunters using shotguns, must wear a minimum of 244 square 
inches of blaze orange. A special-use permit fee ($35) and 7-day entrance fee ($25) 
must be paid. The VCNP honors any National Park Service (NPS) pass to waive the 
$25 entrance fee. This includes NPS Annual, Lifetime, Senior, Military, Volunteer and 
Access passes in addition to the America the Beautiful Pass. Hunters must obtain a 
special-use permit and are required to attend an orientation before hunting on VCNP. 
Hunters should review all information regarding VCNP hunting rules and regulations at:  
https://nps.gov/vall/index.htm. For more information call: 575-829- 0206. 
National Wildlife Refuges (NWR)
NWRs are closed to hunting unless specified open by federal refuge regulations for 
hunting particular species. If specified open, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service-approved, 
nontoxic shot is required for hunting on all NWRs.
Bosque del Apache National Wildlife Refuge:  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 575-835-1828
Bitter Lake National Wildlife Refuge: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 575-622-6755
Las Vegas National Wildlife Refuge:  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505-425-3581
Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge:  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505-864-4021
Forest Service Lands 
Most national forest lands in New Mexico are open to public hunting and fishing. 
Each national forest requires outfitters and guides to obtain a permit to provide 
services. Vehicle-use restrictions may apply on Forest Service properties. Specific 
roads are closed in some national forests to protect natural resources. It is unlawful 
to use vehicles in areas closed under the Habitat Protection Act. Late Season Road 
Closures: If intending to utilize roads through Forest Service or BLM property, it is 
advisable to contact the appropriate land management field office beforehand for late-
season or winter closures and other access restrictions.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 45 ===
  45 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Stay Informed about Controlled Burns
The U.S. Forest Service and other public-land management agencies routinely conduct 
controlled burns in forested areas during the fall months. Prescribed fires maintain 
a diverse and healthy forest ecosystem and improve wildlife habitat. Hunters are 
encouraged to be aware before their hunt and check https://nmfireinfo.com for burn 
advisories. No refunds will be offered if a controlled burn is conducted in your hunt 
area.
Sandia Ranger District: Cibola National Forest
The Sandia Ranger District is restricted to bow and crossbow only during established 
seasons. 
Valle Vidal: Carson National Forest
The Valle Vidal is closed seasonally to public access: the west side is closed May 
1–June 30, and the east side is closed Jan. 1–March 31. The Valle Vidal unit is open 
to deer, elk, bear and turkey hunting by draw only and is closed to all small-game 
hunting. Off-road travel is prohibited, and camping is allowed only in designated 
campgrounds or more than one-half mile from the road. Other restrictions may apply. 
For more information, contact the U.S. Forest Service office in Questa: 575-586-0520 .
For More Information about Forest Service Lands 
For information visit fs.fed.us  or contact the national forest of interest.  
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest 928-333-4301 ;
Carson National Forest 575-758-6200 ; Cibola National Forest 505-346-3900 ;
Coronado National Forest 520-388-8300 ; Gila National Forest 575-388-8201 ;
Lincoln National Forest 575-257-4095 ; or Santa Fe National Forest 505-438-5300 .
Bureau of Land Management Lands
Most land under Bureau of Land Management jurisdiction, including Wilderness 
Study Areas, is open to public hunting and fishing. However, it is the responsibility 
of each hunter and angler to know what restrictions apply. Outfitters and guides 
providing services on BLM lands must possess a permit issued by each specific 
BLM district. Off-road vehicle travel may be restricted or prohibited on BLM lands, 
depending on location. Obey all posted rules and check with local BLM offices for 
regulatory changes that may occur in special management units. 
Rio Bonito Acquired Lands: Contact Roswell BLM office, 575-627-0272.
Santa Cruz Lake Recreation Area:  Contact Taos BLM office, 575-758-8851. 
Rio Grande Recreation Area: Wild Rivers Zone is open to hunting with the exception 
of the closed area: beginning from the fence at the pay station; east following the 
southern boundary of State Land section 32 to where it intersects the power line; south 
following the Red River to its confluence with the Rio Grande; north following the 
Rio Grande to Sheep’s Crossing; east to the right-of-way fence of the Backcountry 
Byway; and south following this right-of-way fence to the pay station. Taos Valley 
Overlook Zone and Orilla Verde Zone are closed to hunting.
For More Information about BLM Lands
For more information visit:  www.blm.gov/new-mexico  or contact: 
Albuquerque: 505-761-8700 ; Carlsbad: 575-887-6544 ; 
Farmington:  505-599-8900 ; Las Cruces: 575-525-4300 ; Roswell: 575-627-0272 ;
Socorro: 575-835-0412 ; Taos: 575-758-8851; or Santa Fe: 505-954-2000 . 
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 46 ===
 46  
2026–2027
Bureau of Reclamation (BOR)
Areas owned and operated by the Bureau of Reclamation are open unless otherwise 
posted. Additional restrictions may apply. For information: 505-462-3540.
Military Reservations
With the cooperation of the U.S. Department of Defense, hunting is allowed on some 
military reservations. Hunters must obtain permission and conditions of access directly 
from the military reservations. Hunters may be required to sign-in and sign-out at check 
stations for some hunts. The U.S. military may delay or cancel hunts (see closures below).
Kirtland Air Force Base:  Contact: 505-846-7420 .
McGregor Range portion of Ft. Bliss:  All hunters and guests on Fort Bliss, 
including all of Unit 28 and portions of Unit 19 and Unit 34, are required to purchase 
a $100 access pass and hunters must have proof of passing a state-certified Hunter 
Education course. Mentor-youth hunters are not eligible. Hunters are required to 
wear a blaze-orange vest, must register their weapons and are subject to security 
searches. McGregor Range (Unit 28) is open for big-game hunting by draw only 
(see species and season listings) and is considered on range. Hunters and guests are 
required to visit ftbliss.isportsman.net  to purchase an access pass and obtain access 
information, or email christopher.a.taylor154.civ@army.mil
GMU 34: Grapevine Canyon (McGregor Range Buffer Zone):  All hunters on Fort 
Bliss are required to obtain an access pass and have proof of passing a state-certified 
Hunter Education course. Mentor-youth hunters are not eligible. Hunters are required 
to wear a blaze-orange vest and are subject to security searches. This area is subject 
to closure by the Forest Service and/or Fort Bliss during military training events, and 
is accessible with military permission only. Hunters and guests are required to visit 
https://ftbliss.isportsman.net  or email christopher.a.taylor154.civ@army.mil  to 
acquire an access pass and obtain access information . 
White Sands Missile Range:  For access information, contact White Sands Missile 
Range at: 575-678-7909  or 575-678-2225 .
U.S. Forest Service & Military Closures:  In the interest of public safety, the U.S. 
Forest Service and U.S. military may delay or cancel hunts in portions of GMUs 10, 
13, 18, 19, 20, 28 and 34. Closures usually occur between 3 p.m. and 8 a.m., during 
which time roadblocks leading into closed areas will be placed and evacuation 
required of all people in these areas. The area subject to closure by the U.S. Forest 
Service and/or the military during missile firings in Unit 34 is located in Grapevine 
Canyon (McGregor Range Buffer Zone). Closures of these areas can occur 
throughout the year and may affect a number of hunts listed in this booklet. The area 
subject to closure in GMU 10 includes approximately 29 square miles of the Mount 
Taylor Ranger District, Cibola National Forest—located in the Zuni Mountains, 
directly south and east of the Fort Wingate Launch Complex and south of Interstate 
40. The area subject to closure in GMU 13 includes approximately 200 square miles 
of the western portion of the Magdalena Ranger District, Cibola National Forest—
located in the Datil Mountains, north of U.S. Hwy. 60 and northeast of Datil, N.M. 
Authority for the closures is 36 CFR 261.53 (e) and 36 CFR 261.54 (e).
Federal Lands
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 47 ===
  47  
2026–2027
New Mexico State Lands
New Mexico State Trust Land
The New Mexico State Wildlife Commission and the Commissioner of Public 
Lands have an agreement that provides access for hunting and fishing of protected 
species on State Trust Land by NMDOW licensees during the seasons for which 
their licenses are valid. Trapping is not allowed on State Trust Lands. A copy of this 
agreement and other information about hunting access on State Trust Land can be 
found at: 
https://www.nmstatelands.org/resources/hunting-access-information/ .  People 
seeking to use State Trust Land for uses not addressed under this agreement must 
secure separate approval from the New Mexico State Land Office (NMSLO). For 
more information, contact NMSLO at: 505-827-5760  or visit:  
https://www.nmstatelands.org/ .
Access
Certain areas may be unavailable for hunting or fishing. For specific locations, view 
the interactive map at: https://mapservice.nmstatelands.org/HuntingInformation/  
or contact NMSLO at 505-827-5760 . The right to enter State Trust Land via vehicle 
is allowed if access is available by public road (defined in Section 67–2–1, NMSA 
1978) or on other established roads on State Trust Land that have not been closed to 
vehicular traffic. Access is also allowed on foot from roads mentioned above or from 
adjacent public and private lands that have been lawfully accessed. NMDOW and 
NMSLO have identified specific hunting access points on State Trust Land that must 
be unlocked during any open season. These access points are shown on NMSLO’s 
interactive map.
To ensure access and create larger and better-defined hunting areas, hunting 
privileges for some State Trust Land have been exchanged for similar privileges on 
private lands. The private-land areas have signs posted with notices that the land has 
been unitized (page 50). Contact NMDOW if you have questions about which lands 
are open for public use.
On legally accessible State Trust Land, you may:
• Scout for big game, small game or turkey 14 days prior to the open season.
• Hunt big game, small game, turkey or protected furbearers during open hours and 
seasons.
• Hunt nongame species on State Trust Land, but only during the period in which your 
license is valid for protected species on those lands. 
• Camp, in campsites designated under this agreement and shown on NMSLO’s 
interactive map, with the permission of the State Trust Land agricultural lessee or as 
otherwise authorized by the Commissioner.
• Have campfires with a valid hunting license in designated or dispersed camping 
areas and only if currently permitted by the New Mexico State Forester.  It is the 
hunter’s responsibility to know current conditions and restrictions. Information 
is available at https://www.nmstatelands.org/resources/hunting-access-
information/. 
• Take up to three guests per license holder on your hunt.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 48 ===
 48 
2026–2027
New Mexico State Lands
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
On State Trust Land, you must:
• Have in your possession all required and valid fishing and hunting licenses with applicable tags.
• Respect other permitted or leased uses of State Trust Land, including agriculture, mineral 
activities and recreation.
• Drive only on established roads, complying with any posted signage and respect private prop-
erty boundaries.
• Close all gates that you pass through.
• Pack out trash.
It is illegal to:
• Use a Private-Land Only License to hunt on state land, even if the state land is leased by a 
landowner whose property you have permission to hunt.
• Attach blinds to agricultural improvements including property such as windmills, fences, 
tanks, etc.
• Drive off-road for any reason.
• Enter during seasons for which you are not licensed or before scouting periods for which you 
are licensed.
• Cross private lands without prior written permission from the landowner.
• Remove wood, sand or gravel or conduct commercial activities.
• Harass or injure livestock or wildlife or damage private property, such as dwellings, stock tanks 
or fences.
If you have problems or questions about gaining access to State Trust Land, record 
complete details including the location, date, time and names of parties involved, and 
contact one of the following:
• The local NMDOW Conservation Officer or Operation Game Thief:  
1-800-432-4263 .
• NMSLO in Santa Fe at: 505-827-5760  or the appropriate local NMSLO Field 
Office, using the directory at: https://www.nmstatelands.org/divisions/surface-
resources/district-offices/ . 
• Submit a Multiple Use Incident Reporting Form, found at: 
https://www.nmstatelands.org/resources/hunting-access-information/ .
New Mexico State Parks
All New Mexico State Parks are closed to hunting, unless specified open in a 
designated area. For information contact the New Mexico State Parks Division at: 
1-888-667-2757 or www.emnrd.nm.gov/spd . 
Other State Lands
Chihuahuan Desert Research Center:  The Chihuahuan Desert Rangeland Research 
Center (College Ranch) is closed to unescorted public access. For information, call: 
575-646-2554  or visit: https://chihuahuansc.nmsu.edu/index.html . 
Jornada Experimental Range:  Jornada Experimental Range in Doña Ana County is 
closed to unescorted public access.
Middle Rio Grande Conservancy District:  For information or to obtain access, call: 
505-864-7466 .
Portions of the Rio Grande in Valencia County:  In the interest of public safety, 
areas posted along the Rio Grande in Valencia County may be closed to hunting.  
For further information regarding closures contact the NMDOW Northwest Area 
Office: 505-222-4700, ext. 0 .
=== page 49 ===
  49 
2026–2027
New Mexico State Wildlife Commission Lands 
The New Mexico State Wildlife Commission owns and manages lands across New 
Mexico for the benefit of fish, wildlife and their habitats. These lands include wildlife 
management areas (WMAs). All WMAs are closed to hunting unless specifically 
listed as open in this booklet. 
Hunting on Wildlife Management Areas
• WMAs designated open to hunting are listed in this booklet by species and GMU. 
• Only New Mexico residents may apply for big-game, upland-game or turkey draw hunts held 
exclusively on WMAs.  Non-residents may apply only for draw hunts open concurrently on 
both a WMA and other public lands. 
• WMA access is allowed by each properly-licensed hunter with up to three guests, during the 
hunt period on their license (includes scouting period for big-game and turkey hunters only).  
• Individuals may not enter closed areas as posted on site.
• Vehicles may not be operated off established roads or on closed roads.
• Camping is restricted to designated areas. Individuals may not camp more than 14 consecu-
tive days, unless the combined hunting and scouting periods for which the hunter is licensed   
exceeds the 14 days.
• Campfires must be safely contained.
• Dogs must remain on leash, except when being used for hunting purposes as allowed by rule.
• Domestic livestock feed must be pelleted grain feed or hay certified as weed free.
• Individuals may not deface or remove rocks, minerals, plants (including fruits, nuts and  
berries), animals (except for legally harvested game), firewood or man-made features (includ-
ing artifacts).
• Individuals may not violate access rules for specific WMAs posted on site or otherwise  
published by NMDOW.
• For information on hunting furbearers and nongame see page 133
For further rules and specific information about each WMA,  
visit Conservation/Wildlife Commission Lands at  
https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/conservation/state-game-commission-lands .
Purchase or Collect Firewood Within New Mexico
Do not bring firewood into New Mexico from other states. The movement of 
firewood from one state to another has become the principal method of introducing 
new damaging insect pests and diseases to forests. Emerald ash borer, Sirex 
Woodwasps, Spongy moth (formerly Gypsy moth), Asian longhorn beetle, oak wilt 
disease and others can be transported in firewood and are the cause of significant 
damage to forests in other states.  These pests are almost always fatal to trees and 
will decimate forested areas as well as riparian areas if they are allowed to get 
established.  If you inadvertently brought in firewood from another state, please 
burn all of it immediately.  Please purchase or collect firewood within New Mexico.  
Purchase or collect firewood within New Mexico.
For more information contact the New Mexico Department 
of Agriculture: 575-646-3207  or the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture–Plant Protection and Quarantine: 575-527-6985. 
Buy it local...Burn it local!
Wildlife Management Areas
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 50 ===
 50 
2026–2027
Private Lands
Hunting on Private Land
Hunters must possess written permission before entering private lands ( see Criminal 
Trespass, pages 38–39). It is unlawful to knowingly enter any private property to 
hunt, capture, take, attempt to take or kill any protected species on posted private 
property without written permission from the landowner or person in control of the 
land. It also is unlawful to remain on private property if consent has been denied 
or withdrawn. Any game taken in violation of the above shall be subject to seizure. 
Written permission form downloadable at: https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/download/
written-permission-to-hunt-private-land/
Unitization Agreements: Access and Use
Unitization agreements are cooperative temporary agreements between landowners 
and the NMDOW, the State Land Office and/or the Bureau of Land Management 
(BLM). These agreements increase public hunting access during the hunting season 
to previously inaccessible areas, while diminishing trespass issues for landowners 
and enabling them to better manage ranching operations. Each agreement is 
reviewed annually, and the public may provide comments.
To take advantage of the hunting opportunities unitized ranches provide, hunters 
must have a valid license for the season and species identified in each agreement.
For maps and information on ranches that have entered into unitization agreements 
visit: https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/hunting/maps/unitized-ranch/.  Also, to assist and 
inform hunters in the field, signs will be posted on public and private property where 
unitization agreements are in effect.
Hunters may hunt specific species on private lands that have been opened through 
a unitization agreement. Hunters must have permission from the lessee to hunt on 
BLM/State Trust lands that have been closed through a unitization agreement. Game 
animals taken in violation of unitization agreements may be seized.
 
Hunting on Native American lands is outside the jurisdiction of the NMDOW . 
Permission must be obtained from the pueblo, tribe or nation that owns the land.
Game and/or fish taken on or from native lands must be accompanied by an official 
document, such as a license or receipt from tribal authorities, which demonstrates 
lawful possession.
Native American Lands 
Contact individual pueblos, tribes and nations for more information.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 51 ===
  51  
2026–2027
Open Gate
Open Gate Program
Open Gate is a voluntary access program available to outdoor users and landowners 
statewide. The program leases lands and waters from private landowners to provide 
access to the public for hunting, fishing and trapping. 
Each property participating in Open Gate will have specific rules for permitted 
activities agreed upon by the landowner and NMDOW. These rules will be posted 
on the property and are also available on the NMDOW website. Hunters, anglers 
and trappers can use this information to locate and learn about properties that match 
their interests.
It is the responsibility of the individual using the property to know and obey posted 
rules. Citations may be issued for violation of any rules or regulations.
Leave no trace. Be a respectful and courteous guest.
• Follow all posted rules.
• Leave all gates as you found them.
• Don’t block gates or roads with parked vehicles.
• Don’t shoot towards livestock, buildings or equipment.
• Do not leave trash, and pick up any trash found along the way.
• If you see the landowner, don’t forget to offer an appreciative thank you!
Landowners Can Earn Extra Cash for an Open Gate Lease
NMDOW is interested in leasing more lands with quality habitat for hunting, fishing 
and trapping. Willing landowners can sign an agreement with NMDOW and receive 
a per-acre payment based on opportunities provided. In addition to property leases, 
NMDOW will also pay for right-of-way access across the property of a landowner 
to allow hunters and anglers access to otherwise inaccessible tracts of State Trust or 
federal lands. New Mexico provides liability protection  
to landowners who participate in Open Gate.
Funding for the Open Gate program is provided  
by a portion of annual HMAV sales. 
To learn more about the Open Gate program,  
please visit: https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/hunting/  
maps/open-gate-program/  
or call: 505-476-8043 .
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 52 ===
 52  
2026–2027
General Information
• License Requirements and Fees (see pages 12–17).
• All Deer Harvests Must Be Tagged (page 37).
• Legal Sporting Arms for Deer Hunting (specified by hunt code,   
see page 30).
• Hunting on Military Reservations (see page 46).
• Mobility–Impaired Hunts (see pages 19–20).
• Youth–Only Hunts (see page 19).
• Chronic Wasting Disease Rules (see page 28).
• It is Legal to Harvest a Marked Animal (see page 9).
Deer Draw Licenses 
The deadline to apply for deer draw licenses is March 18, 2026. Up to four hunters 
may apply per application.
Successful applicants will be mailed a deer license/ tag, unless the E–Tag option is 
chosen. The license includes a hunt code and description of the unit, sporting–arm 
type, season dates and bag limit. T ags include instructions for proper tagging.
Fee Types for Deer Draw Licenses (see glossary, pages 158–163)
Resident and non-resident fees are listed on page 17.
S Standard hunt 
Q Quality hunt
HD High–demand hunt
Q/HD Quality and high–demand hunt combination 
The highest fee for any hunt choice must be paid at the time of application. If a lower 
fee hunt is drawn, the difference will be refunded.
Fourth-Choice Deer Hunts
By selecting 4th–choice, applicants indicate they are willing to accept any deer hunt 
in a specific quadrant of the state. The 4th–choice assignment will always be for the 
same sporting arm type as the 1st choice on an application.
Hunters should understand that success rates for 4th–choice hunts may be low due 
to small and/or localized deer populations. Hunters who draw a 4th–choice hunt 
will not receive a refund and may not obtain a private–land only license if 
dissatisfied with the hunt drawn. 
If applying for a 4th–choice hunt, applicants must select one of the four quadrants 
listed below.
NW Northwest: Units 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 or 14.
NE Northeast: Units 41, 42, 43, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58 or 59.
SW Southwest: Units 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 or 27.
SE Southeast: Units 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38, 39 or 40.
Deer
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 53 ===
  53 
2026–2027
Bag Limits (see glossary, pages 158–160)
FAD Fork-antlered deer (white-tailed or mule deer).
FAMD Fork-antlered mule deer.
FAWTD Fork-antlered white-tailed deer.
ESWTD Either sex white-tailed deer.
A Antlerless deer.
Private–Land Only Deer Licenses
To hunt on private land only (except in Units 2A, 2B, 2C, 4 and 5A listed below), 
hunters must obtain a Private–Land Only Deer License and carcass  tag—available 
online, by telephone, from license vendors or at NMDOW offices. Online and 
telephone purchases must be made at least 14 days prior to the hunt start date to allow 
mailing of tags (see page 13), unless the E–Tag option is chosen. When obtaining 
a Private–Land Only Deer License, the hunter must select a hunt code which 
corresponds with a deer–draw hunt code for the unit, bag limit, sporting arm type 
and season date. If the hunter is a non-resident and selects a corresponding deer draw 
hunt code designated as quality (Q) or high demand (HD), she/he must purchase a 
quality deer license. Hunt codes for units without corresponding public-land draw 
hunts are listed on page 54. Over-the-counter, Private-Land Deer Licenses are not 
valid on any public land.
Private–Land Only Deer Hunting in Units 2A, 2B, 2C, 4 and 5A
To hunt deer only on private land in these units, hunters must obtain an authorization 
code and a hunt code from the landowner and must apply through the regular public 
draw. When applying for private–land only hunts in Unit 5A, only one person per 
application may apply. The application must be completed by 5:00 p.m. March 18, 
2026. Private–land only licenses are not issued by license vendors for hunts in Units 
2A, 2B, 2C, 4 and 5A. 
Landowners must obtain an authorization code  and hunt codes from the NMDOW 
Northwest Area office in Albuquerque or call: 505-222-4710 . 
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
At the New Mexico Department of Wildlife, we ...
... protect and conserve.
GPS-collared approximately 180 big game 
animals over the past year
conducted 320 helicopter and 400 fixed-wing 
survey hours for big-game species
led eight collaborative big-game research 
projects in partnership with New Mexico State 
University, US Geological Survey, US Fish & 
Wildlife Service, Bureau of Land Management, 
and the state of Arizona
mapped eight big-game migration pathways  
=== page 54 ===
 54 
2026–2027
Private-Land Deer Hunting in Units 8, 46, 54, 55A and 55B
Units 8, 46, 54, 55A and 55B have limited public–land hunting opportunities. 
Private–land hunters in these units must select one of the hunt codes listed below. 
Hunt Dates Hunt Code Fee Type Licenses Bag Limit
Unit 8
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-501 Q Unlimited FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-502 Q Unlimited FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-503 Q Unlimited FAD
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 DER-1-500 Q Unlimited FAD
Unit 46
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-506 S Unlimited FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-507 S Unlimited FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-504 S Unlimited FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-505 S Unlimited FAD
Unit 54
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-512 S Unlimited FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-513 S Unlimited FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-508 S Unlimited FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-509 S Unlimited FAD
Any Legal Nov. 25-29 DER-1-510 S Unlimited ESWTD
Any Legal –  
Youth Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-511 S Unlimited FAD
Units 55A and 55B
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-517 S Unlimited FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-518 S Unlimited FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-514 S Unlimited FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-515 S Unlimited FAD
Any Legal – Youth 
Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-516 S Unlimited FAD
Any Legal Nov. 25-29 DER-1-519 S Unlimited ESWTD
Deer
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 55 ===
  55 
2026–2027
Deer Draw Hunts
Draw licenses authorize the hunter to hunt on any open public land within the specified 
unit or hunt area and on any private land in that unit with written permission from the 
landowner of the property. However, hunters with public-land only licenses in Unit 5A 
are not permitted to hunt on any private lands, even with written permission.
Closed Areas: Military reservations, national parks and monuments, state parks 
and monuments, recreation areas, national wildlife refuges, state WMAs and other 
locations may be closed or restrict hunting. All state WMAs are closed unless 
officially designated open to hunting.
Hunt Dates Hunt Code Fee Type Licenses Bag Limit
Premium Statewide Deer Hunt  (see page 43)
Any Legal Sept. 1-Jan.31, 
‘27
DER-1-700 S 1 FAD
Unit 2A Including Pine River WMA
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-104 S 40 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-106 HD 80 FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-108 S 50 FAD
Any Legal - Youth Only Oct. 24-28 DER-1-100 S 25 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-101 S 150 FAD
Any Legal - Youth Only Nov. 21-29 DER-1-103 HD 15 FAD
Unit 2B Including Navajo WMA
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-118 S 130 FAD
Bow - Youth Only Sept. 1-24 DER-2-119 S 20 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-121 Q/HD 180 FAD
Bow - Youth Only Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-122 Q 50 FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-124 S 175 FAD
Muzzle - Youth Only Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-125 S 20 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-110 S 275 FAD
Any Legal - Youth Only Oct. 24-28 DER-1-111 S 125 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-113 S 280 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-115 Q 320 FAD
Any Legal - Youth Only Nov. 21-29 DER-1-117 HD 20 FAD
Unit 2C
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-129 Q/HD 50 FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-131 Q/HD 20 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-127 Q/HD 30 FAD
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 56 ===
 56 
2026–2027
Unit 4 Humphries/Rio Chama/Sargent WMAs Only (NM Residents Only)
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-141 Q 10 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-133 Q 20 FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Oct. 24-28 DER-1-134 Q 10 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-136 Q 20 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-138 Q 10 FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Nov. 25-29 DER-1-140 Q 5 FAD
Unit 5A Public Land Only
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-146 S 30 FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-148 S 10 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 10-16 DER-1-144 S 40 FAD
Unit 5B
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-152 Q 10 FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-153 Q 10 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-150 Q/HD 30 FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-151 Q 10 FAD
Units 6A and 6C
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-156 S 100 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 3-7 DER-3-157 S 115 FAD
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Oct. 10-14 DER-1-154 S 20 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-155 S 110 FAD
Unit 7
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-159 S 10 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-160 HD 15 FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-161 S 25 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-158 S 30 FAD
Unit 8
Bow - Youth Only Nov. 21-29 DER-2-162 Q 65 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-163 Q 65 FAD
Deer
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 57 ===
  57  
2026–2027
Unit 9 Marquez/LBar WMAs only (NM Resident Only)
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-165 S 10 FAD
Unit 9 Including Water Canyon WMA
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-167 S 10 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-168 S 15 FAD
Muzzle - Restricted 
Muzzleloader Only
Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-169 S 10 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-164 S 15 FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-166 S 10 FAD
Unit 10
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-175 S 100 FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-176 S 90 FAD
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Oct. 24-28 DER-1-170 S 20 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-171 S 70 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-172 S 65 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-173 S 90 FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-174 S 25 FAD
Unit 12
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-178 HD 20 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-179 S 40 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-177 S 85 FAD
Unit 13
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-183 S 125 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-184 S 75 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-185 S 200 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-180 S 150 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-181 S 150 FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-182 S 50 FAD
Unit 14
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-187 S 35 FAD
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 58 ===
 58 
2026–2027
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-188 S 25 FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-189 S 55 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-186 S 55 FAD
Unit 15
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-190 S 75 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-191 S 25 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-192 S 165 FAD
Muzzle - Youth 
Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-3-193 S 100 FAD
Unit 16 (A, B, C, D and E)
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-198 S 230 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-199 S 175 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-200 S 300 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-194 S 300 FAD
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Nov. 14-18 DER-1-195 S 25 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-196 S 300 FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-197 S 100 FAD
Unit 17
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-204 Q 75 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-205 Q 75 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-206 Q 80 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-201 Q 80 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-202 Q 80 FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-203 Q 80 FAD
Unit 18
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-209 S 50 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-210 HD 40 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-211 S 75 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-207 S 70 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-208 S 70 FAD
Deer
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 59 ===
  59  
2026–2027
Unit 19 Excluding WSMR Portion and Ft. Bliss
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-214 S 10 FAD
Muzzle Dec. 5-9 DER-3-215 S 10 FAD
Unit 19
1
 WSMR Portion Only
Any Legal Jan. 22-24, '27 DER-1-212 S 5 FAD
Any Legal Jan. 8-10, ‘27 DER-1-213 S 5 FAD
Unit 20
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-218 S 45 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-219 S 25 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-220 S 85 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-216 S 90 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-217 S 90 FAD
Unit 21
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-224 S 300 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-225 S 200 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-226 S 350 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-221 S 425 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-222 S 425 FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-223 S 100 FAD
Any Legal Dec. 5-13 DER-1-227 HD 25 FAWTD
Unit 22
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-231 S 30 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-232 S 25 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-233 S 65 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-228 HD 70 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-229 S 70 FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-230 S 20 FAD
1 White Sands Missile Range (WSMR) ONLY, mandatory check-in/check-out. WSMR will charge a $60 per 
hunter access fee; 50% military discount applies. Successful WSMR applicants will receive an email from 
WSMR with instructions for fee payment. Hunters are responsible for timely payment and will not be allowed 
to hunt if the access fee has not been paid by the specified deadline.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 60 ===
 60 
2026–2027
Unit 23 Excluding Burro Mountain Area
Bow1 Sept. 1-24 DER-2-239 S 205 FAMD
Bow1 Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-240 HD 50 FAMD
Bow1 Sept. 1-24 DER-2-241 S 100 FAWTD
Bow1 Jan. 16-31, ‘27 DER-2-242 S 50 FAWTD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-243 S 225 FAMD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-244 S 75 FAWTD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-234 S 450 FAMD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-235 S 450 FAMD
Any Legal Nov. 21-25 DER-1-236 HD 100 FAWTD
Any Legal Dec. 5-13 DER-1-237 HD 55 FAWTD
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-238 S 75 FAD
Unit 23 Burro Mountain Area Only
Bow1 Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-248 Q 40 FAMD
Bow1 Sept. 1-24 DER-2-249 Q 20 FAWTD
Bow1 Jan. 16-31, ‘27 DER-2-250 Q 50 FAWTD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-251 Q 40 FAMD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-252 Q 40 FAWTD
Any Legal Nov. 7-15 DER-1-245 Q 35 FAMD
Any Legal Dec. 5-13 DER-1-246 Q/HD 40 FAWTD
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-247 Q/HD 25 FAD
Unit 24 Excluding Fort Bayard Management Area, 
Including Double E and River Ranch WMAs
Bow1 Sept. 1-24 DER-2-259 S 135 FAMD
Bow1 Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-260 S 85 FAMD
Bow1 Sept. 1-24 DER-2-261 S 60 FAWTD
Bow1 Jan. 16-31, ‘27 DER-2-262 S 40 FAWTD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-263 S 280 FAMD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-264 S 75 FAWTD
1 Hunters holding a valid Bow Deer License for Units 23 and 24 and who did not harvest a deer during 
an above hunt, will be allowed to hunt antlerless deer within the Silver City Deer Management Area (as 
determined by NMDOW) from Jan. 16-Feb. 5, 2027.
Deer
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 61 ===
  61 
2026–2027
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-254 S 400 FAMD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-255 S 400 FAMD
Any Legal Nov. 21-25 DER-1-256 S 100 FAWTD
Any Legal Dec. 5-13 DER-1-258 HD 50 FAWTD
Unit 24 Including Fort Bayard Management Area
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Sept. 26-Oct.4 DER-1-253 S 50 FAD
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-257 S 50 FAD
Unit 25
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-267 S 45 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-268 S 30 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-269 S 45 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-265 S 100 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-266 S 100 FAD
Unit 26
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-272 S 25 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-273 S 15 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-274 S 60 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-270 S 100 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-271 S 100 FAD
Any Legal Dec. 5-13 DER-1-275 HD 25 FAWTD
Unit 27
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-281 Q 30 FAMD
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-282 Q 15 FAWTD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-283 Q/HD 30 FAMD
Bow Jan. 16-31, ‘27 DER-2-284 Q 40 FAWTD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-285 Q 40 FAMD
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-3-286 Q 50 FAWTD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-276 Q 50 FAMD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-277 Q 50 FAMD
Any Legal Nov. 21-25 DER-1-278 Q/HD 40 FAWTD
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 62 ===
 62  
2026–2027
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-279 Q 25 FAD
Any Legal Dec. 5-13 DER-1-280 Q/HD 25 FAWTD
Unit 28 McGregor Range Only
1
 (CWD detected in this area, see page 28)
Any Legal Dec. 19-20 DER-1-287 S 25 FAD
Any Legal -  
Military Only
Dec. 19-20 DER-1-288 HD 25 FAD
Unit 29 (CWD detected in this area, see page 28)
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-291 S 100 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-292 S 50 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 24-28 DER-3-293 S 70 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-289 S 150 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-290 S 150 FAD
Unit 30
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-297 S 200 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-298 HD 100 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 24-28 DER-3-299 S 325 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-294 S 720 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-295 S 720 FAD
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-296 S 250 FAD
Unit 31 Including Prairie Chicken WMAs
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-302 S 175 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-303 HD 100 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 24-28 DER-3-304 S 175 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-300 S 440 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 21-25 DER-1-301 S 435 FAD
Unit 32 Including Prairie Chicken WMAs
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-309 S 150 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-310 S 100 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 24-28 DER-3-311 S 175 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-305 S 565 FAD
Deer
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
1All hunters and their guests must pay a $100 access fee.
=== page 63 ===
  63 
2026–2027
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-306 S 560 FAD
Any Legal -  
Youth Only1
Dec. 16-31 DER-1-307 S 15 A
Any Legal1 Jan. 16-31, ‘27 DER-1-308 S 15 A
Unit 33 Including Prairie Chicken WMAs
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-314 Q 60 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-315 Q/HD 50 FAD
Muzzle - restricted 
muzzleloader only
Oct. 24-28 DER-3-316 Q 140 FAD
Muzzle - Huey 
WMA only / NM 
Resident Only / 
Youth Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-3-317 Q 5 ES
Muzzle - Huey 
WMA only / NM 
Resident Only / 
Youth Only
 Dec. 26-Jan.1, ‘27 DER-3-318 Q 5 A
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-312 Q 150 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 21-25 DER-1-313 Q 150 FAD
Unit 34 (CWD detected in this area. See page 28)
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-323 S 450 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-324 S 350 FAD
Muzzle Nov. 7-11 DER-3-325 S 340 FAD
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-319 S 50 FAD
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-320 S 45 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-321 S 650 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 21-25 DER-1-322 S 650 FAD
Unit 36
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-329 S 225 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-330 S 125 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 24-28 DER-3-331 S 115 FAD
Muzzle - Youth 
Only
Oct. 24-28 DER-3-332 S 25 FAD
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
1Roswell and Ft. Sumner Hunt Areas ONLY
=== page 64 ===
 64  
2026–2027
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-326 S 300 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 DER-1-327 S 300 FAD
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-328 S 25 FAD
Unit 37
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-335 S 100 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-336 S 80 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 24-28 DER-3-337 S 125 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-333 S 365 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 21-25 DER-1-334 S 360 FAD
Unit 38
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-340 S 65 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-341 S 40 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 24-28 DER-3-342 S 100 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-338 S 160 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 21-25 DER-1-339 S 155 FAD
Unit 39
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-345 S 25 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-346 S 15 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 24-28 DER-3-347 S 40 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-343 S 35 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 21-25 DER-1-344 S 35 FAD
Unit 40
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-350 S 20 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-351 S 15 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 24-28 DER-3-352 S 30 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-348 S 50 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 21-25 DER-1-349 S 50 FAD
Unit 41
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-358 Q 10 FAD
Bow Jan. 1-15, ‘27 DER-2-359 Q 10 FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-360 Q 25 FAD
Deer
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 65 ===
  65 
2026–2027
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-353 Q 40 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-354 Q 40 FAD
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-355 Q 5 FAD
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Dec. 5-9 DER-1-356 Q 15 ESWTD
Any Legal Dec. 12-16 DER-1-357 Q 10 ESWTD
Unit 42
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-364 S 15 FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-365 S 15 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-361 S 40 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-362 S 40 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 25-29 DER-1-363 S 10 ESWTD
Unit 43
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-367 S 10 FAD
Muzzle Oct. 24-28 DER-3-368 S 15 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-366 S 35 FAD
Unit 45
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-373 S 165 FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-374 S 160 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-369 S 250 FAD
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Nov. 7-11 DER-1-370 S 25 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-371 S 250 FAD
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-372 S 25 FAD
Unit 47
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-377 S 10 FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-378 S 20 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-375 S 25 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-376 S 20 FAD
Unit 48
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-381 S 45 FAD
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 66 ===
 66  
2026–2027
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-382 S 30 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-379 S 50 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-380 S 50 FAD
Unit 49
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-385 S 105 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-383 S 100 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-384 S 100 FAD
Unit 50
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-388 S 5 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-386 S 50 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-387 S 50 FAD
Unit 51A
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-390 S 65 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-389 S 145 FAD
Unit 51B
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-393 S 15 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-391 S 20 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-392 S 15 FAD
Unit 52
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-396 S 80 FAD
Muzzle - Restricted 
muzzleloader only
Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-397 S 25 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-394 S 90 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-395 S 90 FAD
Unit 53
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-400 S 100 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-398 S 85 FAD
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 DER-1-399 S 85 FAD
Units 54 and 55A Colin Neblett WMA Only (NM Residents Only)
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-403 S 10 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-401 S 10 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-402 S 10 FAD
Deer
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 67 ===
  67  
2026–2027
Unit 55A (NM Residents Only)
Any Legal - ES 
Barker WMA only
Oct. 24-28 DER-1-404 S 5 FAD
Any Legal - ES 
Barker WMA only / 
Youth Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-405 S 5 FAD
Any Legal - Urraca 
WMA only
Oct. 24-28 DER-1-406 S 5 FAD
Any Legal - Urraca 
WMA only
Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-407 S 5 FAD
Unit 55A Valle Vidal Only
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-408  Q  10   FAD
Unit 56
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-413  S  10   FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-414  S  15   FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-409  S  15   FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-410  S  15   FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1- 411  S  10   FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
 Dec. 5-9 DER-1-412  S  10 ESWTD
Unit 57 Sugarite Canyon State Park Only
Bow Nov. 1-30 DER-2-420  Q  20   FAD
Unit 57 Excluding Sugarite Canyon State Park
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-419  S  20   FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-421  S  15   FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-415  S  25   FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-416  S  25   FAD
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-417  S  10   FAD
Any Legal Nov. 25-29 DER-1-418  S  10 ESWTD
Unit 58
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-427  S  10   FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-428  S  25   FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-422  S  40   FAD
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 68 ===
 68 
2026–2027
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-423  S  35   FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-424  S  10   FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Dec. 5-9 DER-1-425  S  15 ESWTD
Any Legal Dec. 12-16 DER-1-426  S  15 ESWTD
Unit 59
Bow Sept. 1-24 DER-2-434  S  10 FAD
Muzzle Sept. 27-Oct.3 DER-3-435  S  25 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 DER-1-429  S  40 FAD
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov.4 DER-1-430  S  40 FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Nov. 21-29 DER-1-431  S   5 FAD
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Dec. 5-9 DER-1-432  S  15 ESWTD
Any Legal Dec. 12-16 DER-1-433  S  15 ESWTD
Deer
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
EASY ACCESS:  
SCAN THIS CODE
APPLYING FOR THE
BIG GA M E  DR AW?  
Don’t wait until the last minute.  
Avoid long wait times. 
Avoid missing a deadline. 
Apply online! Apply early! 
=== page 69 ===
  69  
2026–2027
Thank you for making a difference!
Braden McIntosh was 10-years-old when he worked with the 2023 New
Mexico Legislature to pass SB392, which made possible an opportunity for
hunters and anglers to directly support NMDOW Youth Programs.
Designed by Braden McIntosh, 13-year-old hunter, angler, outdoors
enthusiast and advocate. Follow him on @NMYouthOutdoors
Because of generous hunters and anglers like you,
we’ve raised over $35,000 to support New Mexico
Department of Wildlife’s Youth Programs throughout
our state – keeping our hunting, fishing and
conservation traditions alive for the next generation.
Select
“Youth Programs”
when you purchase your
hunting or fishing
license to donate $2 or a
custom amount.
*Funds are earmarked for youth programs
in the Game Protection Fund.
Thank youTTTThThThhhahahaaananannnkkkk yyyyoyoyooouuuu
Because of gen
we’ve raised ov
Department of
fofof r making a diffffffffffofooofofofoffffofff rororrr mmmmamamaaakakakkkikikiiinnnngggg aaaa ddddiiiiffffffffffffffffffffffffffff
f
o
r
 m
a
k
i
n
g
 a
f
f
f
f
o
f
o
f
o
o
o
f
o
f
o
f
o
f
f
f
f
o
f
f
f
 r
o
r
o
r
r
r
 m
m
m
m
a
m
a
m
a
a
a
k
a
k
a
k
k
k
i
k
i
k
i
i
i
n
n
n
n
g
g
g
g
 a
a
a
a
 d
d
d
d
erous hunters and angle
ver $35,000 to support N
Wildlifefef ’s YoYoY uth Programs
n
v
W
fefef rence!ffffefefeeefefefeffffefff rererrrerereeenenennnccccececeee!!!!
rs like you,
New Mexico
throughout
ffffffeffffefff
er
N
s
ade
Thank you for making a difference!
Select 
"Youth Programs" 
when you purchase 
your hunting 
or fishing license 
to donate $2 
or a custom 
amount.
Designed by Braden McIntosh, 13-year-old hunter, angler, 
outdoors enthusiast and advocate.
=== page 70 ===
 70 
2026–2027
General Information
• License Requirements and Fees (see pages 12–17).
• All Elk Harvests Must Be Tagged (pages 37).
• Private-land Elk License Fees (see page 73).
• Legal Sporting Arms for Elk Hunting (specified by hunt code,   
see page 30).
• Hunting on Military Reservations (see page 46).
• Mobility-impaired Hunts (see pages 19–20). 
• Youth-only Hunts (see page 19).
• Chronic Wasting Disease Rules (see page 28).
• It is Legal to Harvest a Marked Animal (see page 9).
Elk Draw Licenses 
Deadline to apply for elk draw licenses is March 18, 2026. Up to four hunters may 
apply per application. Non-residents  are ineligible for any hunts held exclusively on 
WMAs or any antlerless (A) elk draw licenses.
Successful applicants will be mailed an elk license/tag , unless the E-Tag option is 
chosen. The license includes a hunt code and description of the unit, sporting-arm 
type, season dates and bag limit. T ags include instructions for proper tagging.
Fee Types for Elk Draw Licenses (see glossary, pages 158–163)
Resident and non-resident fees are listed on page 17.
S Standard hunt 
Q Quality hunt
HD High–demand hunt
Q/HD Quality and high–demand hunt combination 
The highest fee for any hunt choice must be paid at the time of application. If a lower 
fee hunt is drawn, the difference will be refunded.
Fourth-Choice Elk Hunts
By selecting fourth-choice, applicants indicate they are willing to accept any elk hunt 
in a specific quadrant of the state. The fourth-choice assignment will always be for 
the same sporting-arm type as the first- choice on the application.
Hunters should understand that success rates for fourth-choice hunts may be low, due 
to small and/or localized elk populations. Not all hunts are available in the fourth-
choice hunt pool. Hunters who apply for and receive a fourth-choice hunt will not 
receive a refund if dissatisfied with the hunt drawn.
A hunter drawing a fourth-choice hunt could receive a license with an antlerless bag 
limit, even if his/her prior three choices were for mature bull licenses.
If applying for a fourth-choice hunt, applicants must select one of the four quadrants 
listed. 
Elk
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 71 ===
  71  
2026–2027
Fourth-Choice Elk Hunt Quadrants
NW Northwest: Units 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12 or 14
NE Northeast: Units 42, 43, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58 or 59
SW Southwest: Units 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23 or 24
SE Southeast: Units 28, 30, 33, 34, 36, 37 or 38
Bag Limits (Glossary, page 158–163 )
MB Mature bull. A spike bull is not legal.
MB/A Mature bull or antlerless elk. A spike bull is not legal.
A Antlerless elk. 
ES Either sex (any one elk, includes spike bull).
APRE/6 Antler-point-restricted elk (six or more points on at least one antler).
APRE/6/A Antler-point-restricted elk (six or more points on at least one antler) or antlerless. 
Valle Vidal
Once-in-a-Lifetime Mature Bull/Either Sex:  Only hunters who have never drawn a 
MB or ES hunt on the Valle Vidal are eligible to apply. Exception: hunters who have 
drawn the Valle Vidal once-in-a-youth MB or A hunt are still eligible to apply.
Once-in-a-Lifetime Antlerless:  Only New Mexico residents who have never drawn 
an antlerless (A) hunt on the Valle Vidal are eligible to apply. Exception: New 
Mexico residents who have drawn the Valle Vidal once-in-a-youth MB or A hunt 
are still eligible to apply.
Note: If a youth has drawn a Valle Vidal once-in-a-lifetime hunt, she/he will not be 
eligible as an adult for that hunt. However, if the youth has drawn a Valle Vidal once-
in-a-youth hunt, she/he is eligible to draw a once-in-a-lifetime Valle Vidal hunt.
Once-in-a-Youth Mature Bull:  Only hunters 17 years or younger who have never 
drawn a youth-only MB hunt on the Valle Vidal and who possess a Hunter Education 
number (page 23) are eligible to apply.
Once-in-a-Youth Antlerless:  Only New Mexico residents 17 years or younger 
who have never drawn a youth-only antlerless hunt on the Valle Vidal and possess a 
Hunter Education number  (page 23) are eligible to apply.
Private-Land Hunts
Private-land elk hunts are available in the primary, secondary and special elk 
management zones. Participating primary and special elk management zone 
landowners and their contact information is available online: 
https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/hunting/maps/eplus/
Private-Land Elk Licenses may be purchased online, by telephone and at NMDOW  
offices or license vendors. Online and telephone purchases must be made at least 14 
days prior to the hunt start date to allow time for mailing. For assistance with this 
process please call: 1-888-248-6866 .
Primary Management Zone:  Areas within the state where elk management is 
focused and the number of licenses is limited. Private-land elk authorizations are 
issued in the primary management zone to landowners participating in the Elk 
Private Lands Use System (EPLUS). Authorizations can be bartered, sold or traded. 
An authorization allows the holder to purchase a Private-Land Elk License. 
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 72 ===
 72 
2026–2027
To purchase a Private-Land Elk License for the primary management zone, a hunter 
must have an authorization number from a landowner participating in the EPLUS 
program. Authorizations can be bartered, sold or traded. 
Secondary Management Zone:  Areas not part of the primary or special 
management zones where no specific elk management goals are set. Private-Land 
Elk Licenses in the secondary management zone are unlimited and available over the 
counter with a ranch code beginning with "SMZ" provided by a registered landowner 
and are valid only on the private landowner's deeded property, or other private lands 
within the secondary management zone with written landowner permission. (Written 
permission from the landowner while hunting is required for the license to be valid). 
Visit https://wildlife.state.nm.us/download/written-permission-to-hunt-private-
land/ to download the form.
Special Management Zone:  Areas not part of the primary or secondary 
management zones where private-land elk authorizations are issued to private 
landowners on a ranch-by-ranch basis through EPLUS. To purchase a Private-Land 
Elk License for the special management zone, a hunter must have an authorization 
number from a landowner participating in the EPLUS program.
Obtaining Authorizations
The process for obtaining private land elk authorization:
Hunters must obtain an authorization number or ranch code from the landowner, 
guide or outfitter. The number or code allows the hunter to purchase a private-land 
elk license. The fee for the authorization is determined  by the landowner, guide or 
outfitter, and this fee does not apply to the elk license fee paid to NMDOW .
Hunters seeking private-land authorizations are encouraged to communicate clearly 
with landowners regarding conditions associated with the license purchased and 
any other special considerations, and to obtain these communications in writing. 
Obtaining private-land elk authorizations is considered a private matter. NMDOW  
is not a party to these transactions or communications and is not responsible for 
resolving disputes.
Landowners participate voluntarily in private-land programs, and the courtesy each 
hunter exercises can affect future access for all hunters.  
Hunters may not hold both a Private-Land Elk License and a Draw Elk License 
in the same license year and may not exchange a draw license for a Private-Land 
License.
Unit-wide or Ranch-Only Authorizations
Unit-wide:  A unit-wide authorization number allows a hunter to purchase an elk 
license valid on any legally accessible public lands, other unit-wide ranches, and 
other private land with written permission within the GMU. Unit-wide authorizations 
are available only in the primary management zone. A habitat stamp is required.
Ranch-Only:  A ranch-only authorization number allows a hunter to purchase an 
elk license valid only on the private deeded acres of the designated ranch, except 
as otherwise allowed by rule. In GMUs 4, 5A, and in secondary and special 
management zones, ranch-only elk licenses may also be valid on other private lands 
within the same GMU and management zone, with written permission. Ranch-only 
licenses are not valid on any public land.
Elk
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 73 ===
73 
2026–2027
It is not considered trespassing if a hunter is in possession of a Private-Land Elk 
License that has been obtained from the owner or person in control of the land and 
which grants access to that particular private land for the purpose of lawfully taking 
elk (pages 38–39). However, in the secondary management zone written permission 
from the landowner is required for the elk hunter.
Elk Management Zone and Unit-Wide Ranch Maps 
Maps of the elk management zones and unit-wide ranches are available online: 
https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/hunting/maps/eplus/
License Fees (additional requirements, pages 12–17)
In the Primary and Special Management Zones, a $9 landowner administrative fee will apply.
Resident Non-resident
Antlerless $70 $573 
Mature-Bull or Either-Sex $100 $773
Quality Antlerless $70 $998
Quality Mature-Bull or Either-Sex $100 $998
Junior/Senior Elk License $70 Not Issued
Quality Elk Hunt Fees for Private-land Authorizations
For all hunt dates from Sept. 15-Oct. 15, quality elk license fees apply to any mature-
bull (MB) or either-sex (ES) ranch-only authorization (except Youth Only) on private 
lands that lie within the primary management zone in Units 13, 15, 16, 17.
Quality elk license fees apply to any unit-wide license for the following hunts:
Bow-Only Hunts: ELK-2-257, ELK-2-265, ELK-2-273, ELK-2-280, ELK-2-285, 
ELK-2-292, ELK-2-299, ELK-2-306
Muzzleloader, Crossbow and Bow Hunts: ELK–3-259, ELK–3-267, ELK–3-301, ELK–3-308
Any Legal Sporting Arm Hunts: ELK-1-274, ELK-1-275, ELK-1-281, ELK-1-282, ELK-1-287, 
ELK-1-293, ELK-1-294
Primary Management Zone Seasons
Ranch-Only Season Dates:  Ranch-only authorizations within the primary 
management zone are restricted to the following season dates and sporting arm type. 
Bow-Only Hunts License valid for either season (select one or the other)
Hunt Dates Units
Sept. 1-14 2, 4, 5A, 5B, 6A, 6C, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16A, 16B/22, 16C, 
16D, 16E, 17, 21A, 21B, 23, 24, 34, 36, 45, 48, 49 and 50–53
Sept. 15-24 2, 4, 5A, 5B, 6A, 6C, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16A, 16B/22, 16C, 
16D, 16E, 17, 21A, 21B, 23, 24, 34, 36, 45, 48, 49, 50–53
Muzzleloader, Crossbow 
and Bow Hunts
License limited to any five consecutive days  
within a season listed below
Hunt Dates Units
Oct. 10-14 2, 6A, 6C, 7, 10, 16E, 36, 23, 24, 45, 48, 52, 53
Oct. 17-21 34
Oct. 17-Dec. 31 9, 13, 15, 17 (muzzleloader only)
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 74 ===
74 
2026–2027
Primary Management Zone Seasons: Ranch-Only Season Dates—continued.
License limited to any five consecutive days within a season listed below.
Hunt Dates Units
Any Legal Sporting Arm Hunts
Oct. 1–Dec. 31 4, 21B
Oct. 10–Dec. 31 5A, 5B, 12, 16B/22, 21A, 49, 50, 51
Oct. 17–Dec. 31 2, 10, 6A, 6C, 7, 16A, 16C, 16D, 36, 45, 48, 52, 53  
Oct. 17-Jan. 31, '27 36 (Antlerless only)
Oct. 24–Dec. 31 16E, 23, 24, 34
Oct. 24-Feb. 10, '27 34 (Antlerless only)
Youth Only Season Dates
Any Legal Sporting Arm Hunts
Oct. 10–14 16C, 16E, 23, 24, 34
Muzzleloader, Bow or Crossbow Hunts
Oct. 10–14 13, 15, 17
Mobility-Impaired Season Dates
Any Legal Sporting Arm Hunts
Oct. 10–14 16A, 16D, 34
Muzzleloader, Bow or Crossbow Hunts
Oct. 10–14 9
Unit-wide Se ason Dates: Unit-wide authorizations within the primary management 
zone correspond with an elk draw hunt code for the same GMU and are restricted to 
the same bag limit, sporting arm and hunt dates.
Special and Secondary Management Zones 
Season D ates: All authorizations within the special and secondary management 
zone are ranch-only. Bow-only and any legal sporting arms hunts are available. Bow-
only hunts are limited to Sept. 1–24. Any legal sporting arms hunts are limited to any 
five consecutive days from Oct. 1–Dec. 31, unless otherwise allowed by NMDOW. 
Bow-only and any legal sporting arms hunts are available.
In Unit 34, antlerless only, any legal sporting arms hunts are limited to any five 
consecutive days from Oct. 1, 2026–Feb. 10, 2027. In Unit 36, antlerless only, any 
legal sporting arms hunts are limited to any five consecutive days from Oct. 1, 2026–
Jan. 31, 2027. 
Elk
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 75 ===
  75 
2026–2027
Elk Draw Hunts
Draw licenses authorize the hunter to hunt on any open public land or any unit-wide 
private ranch within the specified unit or hunt area, and on any other private land in 
that unit, provided that written permission has been obtained from the landowner 
of the property. Draw hunts for WMAs or special-hunt areas are valid only on the 
chosen WMA or special-hunt area printed on the license.
Closed Areas: Military reservations, national parks and monuments, state parks 
and monuments, recreation areas, national wildlife refuges, state WMAs and other 
locations may be closed or restrict hunting. All state WMAs are closed unless 
officially open to hunting.
Hunt Dates Hunt Code Fee Type Licenses Bag Limit
Premium Statewide Elk Hunt ( page 43)
Any Legal Sept. 1-Jan.31, ‘27 ELK-1-700 S 1 MB
Unit 2
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-129 HD 120 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-130 HD 120 ES
Muzzle Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-131 S 135 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-132 S 85 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 12-16 ELK-1-133 S 125 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only / 
Youth Only
Dec. 12-16 ELK-1-134 S 75 A
Unit 2C (NM Residents Only)
Any Legal Dec. 5-9 ELK-1-135 S 75 A
Unit 4 Sargent WMA Only (NM Residents Only)
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-163 Q 10 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-164 Q 10 ES
Any Legal Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-165 Q 10 MB/A
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-166 Q 10 MB/A
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-167 Q 10 MB/A
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov. 4 ELK-1-168 S 10 MB/A
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 ELK-1-169 S 10 A
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Nov. 7-11 ELK-1-170 S 10 A
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 76 ===
 76  
2026–2027
Unit 4 Humphries and Rio Chama WMAs Only (NM Residents Only)
Bow - Humphries/
Rio Chama WMAs 
only
Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-171 S 10 ES
Bow - Humphries/
Rio Chama WMAs 
only
Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-172 S 10 ES
Any Legal Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-173 S 15 MB/A
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-174 S 15 MB/A
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 ELK-1-175 S 10 A
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Nov. 7-11 ELK-1-176 S 15 A
Unit 4 Rio Chama WMA Only (NM Residents Only)
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 ELK-1-177 S 20 A
Unit 5A Public Land Only
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-136 S 5 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-137 S 5 ES
Any Legal Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-138 S 10 MB
Any Legal – NM 
Resident Only
Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-139 S 10 A
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-140 S 10 MB
Any Legall – NM 
Resident Only
Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-141 S 10 A
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-142 S 10 MB
Any Legall – NM 
Resident Only
Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-143 S 10 A
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov. 4 ELK-1-144 S 10 MB
Any Legall – NM 
Resident Only
Oct. 31-Nov. 4 ELK-1-145 S 10 A
Unit 5B
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-178 HD 76 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-179 S 75 ES
Any Legal Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-180 S 86 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-181 S 59 A
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-182 S 86 MB
Elk
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 77 ===
  77 
2026–2027
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Oct. 31-Nov. 4 ELK-1-183 S 59 A
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 ELK-1-184 HD 87 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 14-18 ELK-1-185 S 59 A
Any Legal Dec. 19-23 ELK-1-186 HD 87 MB
Unit 6A
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-213 HD 150 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-214 HD 102 ES
Muzzle Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-215 HD 104 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-216 HD 100 MB
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-217 HD 103 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Oct. 31-Nov. 4 ELK-1-218 S 99 A
Unit 6B (Valles Caldera – Hunter orientation is required, see page 44)
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-219  Q/HD 25 ES
Bow - NM Resident 
Only
Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-220 S 10 A
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-221  Q/HD 25 ES
Bow - NM Resident 
Only
Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-222 S 10 A
Muzzle Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-223  Q/HD 15 ES
Muzzle - NM 
Resident Only
Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-224 S 20 A
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-225  Q/HD 15 ES
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-226 S 20 A
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-227  Q/HD 20 ES
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-228 S 15 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only / 
Youth Only
Oct. 31-Nov.4 ELK-1-229 S 35 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 7-11 ELK-1-230 S 35 A
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 78 ===
 78 
2026–2027
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 21-25 ELK-1-231 S 35 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only / 
Youth Only
Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-232 S 35 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-1-233 S 35 A
Unit 6C
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-234 HD 150 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-235 HD 105 ES
Muzzle Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-236 HD 155 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-237 S 105 MB
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-238 S 105 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Oct. 31-Nov. 4 ELK-1-239 S 110 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 21-25 ELK-1-240 S 110 A
Unit 7
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-241 S 15 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-242 S 14 ES
Muzzle Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-243 S 24 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-244 S 30 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-245 S 50 A
Unit 9 Marquez/LBar WMA Only (NM Residents Only)
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-146 S 15 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-147 S 15 ES
Muzzle Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-148 S 15 MB
Muzzle Oct. 17-21 ELK-3-149 S 15 MB
Muzzle Oct. 24-28 ELK-3-150 S 15 MB
Unit 9 Including Water Canyon WMA
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-151 S 82 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-152 S 82 ES
Muzzle - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-153 S 21 MB
Elk
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 79 ===
  79  
2026–2027
Muzzle Oct. 17-21 ELK-3-154 S 35 MB
Muzzle Oct. 24-28 ELK-3-155 S 35 MB
Muzzle Oct. 31-Nov. 4 ELK-3-156 S 21 MB
Unit 10
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-157 HD 125 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-158 HD 125 ES
Muzzle Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-159 HD 70 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-160 S 70 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only / 
Youth Only
Nov. 14-18 ELK-1-161 S 120 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-1-162 S 100 A
Unit 12
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-246 HD 36 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-247 HD 35 ES
Bow Dec. 12-16 ELK-2-255 S 25 APRE/6
Any Legal Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-248 HD 35 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-249 HD 60 MB
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-250 HD 80 MB
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 ELK-1-251 HD 80 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 21-25 ELK-1-252 S 60 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-253 S 60 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-1-254 S 64 A
Unit 13
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-256 HD 202 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-257  Q/HD 148 ES
Muzzle - Youth Only Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-258 HD 30 ES
Muzzle Oct. 17-21 ELK-3-259  Q/HD 86 MB
Muzzle Oct. 24-28 ELK-3-260 HD 126 MB
Muzzle Nov. 21-25 ELK-3-261 S 126 MB
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 80 ===
 80 
2026–2027
Muzzle - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-3-262 S 117 A
Muzzle - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 12-16 ELK-3-263 S 116 A
Unit 14
Any Legal Oct. 1-5 ELK-1-392 S 10 ES
Unit 15
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-264 HD 350 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-265  Q/HD 250 ES
Muzzle - Youth Only Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-266 HD 25 ES
Muzzle Oct. 17-21 ELK-3-267  Q/HD 200 MB
Muzzle Oct. 24-28 ELK-3-268 HD 245 MB
Muzzle Nov. 14-18 ELK-3-269 S 250 MB
Muzzle - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-3-270 S 250 A
Muzzle - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 12-16 ELK-3-271 S 250 A
Unit 16A
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-272 HD 250 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-273  Q/HD 150 ES
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-274  Q/HD 25 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-275  Q/HD 75 MB
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-276 HD 100 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-1-277 S 75 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 12-16 ELK-1-278 S 75 A
Units 16B and 22
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-279 HD 225 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-280  Q/HD 165 ES
Any Legal Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-281  Q/HD 25 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-282  Q/HD 80 MB
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-283 HD 120 MB
Elk
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 81 ===
  81 
2026–2027
Unit 16C
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-284 HD 144 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-285  Q/HD 100 ES
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-286 S 25 ES
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-287 Q 35 MB
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-288 S 65 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-1-289 S 50 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 12-16 ELK-1-290 S 48 A
Unit 16D
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-291 HD 90 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-292  Q/HD 60 ES
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-293  Q/HD 25 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-294  Q/HD 55 MB
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-295 HD 50 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-1-296 S 50 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 12-16 ELK-1-297 S 50 A
Unit 16E
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-298 HD 90 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-299  Q/HD 60 ES
Muzzle Oct. 17-21 ELK-3-301  Q/HD 70 MB
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-300 HD 25 ES
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-302 S 53 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-1-303 S 75 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 12-16 ELK-1-304 S 75 A
Unit 17
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-305 HD 125 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-306  Q/HD 75 ES
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 82 ===
2026–2027
Individual unit maps can be downloaded at: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Game Management Unit Map
This map is for locating Game Management Units (GMUs) and is not intended for determining precise boundaries. GMU maps are available at:  
https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/hunting/maps/big-game-unit-maps-pdfs/ . 

=== page 83 ===
2026–2027
83
SCAN FOR 
OFFICER 
MAP AND 
CONTACTS
=== page 84 ===
 84 
2026–2027
Muzzle - Youth Only Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-307 HD 25 ES
Muzzle Oct. 17-21 ELK-3-308  Q/HD 100 MB
Muzzle Oct. 24-28 ELK-3-309 HD 100 MB
Muzzle Nov. 21-25 ELK-3-310 HD 25 MB
Muzzle - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 21-25 ELK-3-311 S 25 A
Muzzle - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-3-312 S 100 A
Muzzle - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 12-16 ELK-3-313 S 100 A
Unit 18
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-393 S 25 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-394 HD 25 ES
Any Legal Oct. 1-5 ELK-1-395 HD 10 ES
Unit 21A
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-314 HD 50 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-315 HD 50 ES
Bow Dec. 19-23 ELK-2-320 S 15 MB
Any Legal Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-316 HD 15 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-317 HD 35 MB
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-318 HD 55 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-1-319 S 30 A
Unit 21B
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-321 HD 25 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-322 HD 25 ES
Bow Dec. 19-23 ELK-2-330 S 15 MB
Any Legal Oct. 1-5 ELK-1-323 HD 10 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-324 HD 15 MB
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-325 S 25 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 21-25 ELK-1-326 S 15 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-327 S 15 A
Elk
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 85 ===
  85 
2026–2027
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-1-328 S 15 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 12-16 ELK-1-329 S 20 A
Unit 23
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-331 HD 125 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-332 HD 75 ES
Bow Dec. 19-23 ELK-2-337 S 15 MB
Muzzle Oct. 17-21 ELK-3-334 S 75 MB
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-333 HD 25 ES
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-335 HD 75 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-1-336 S 20 A
Any Legal - South 
of NM 78 / NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 19-27 ELK-1-338 S 20 A
Unit 24 excluding Ft. Bayard Mgmt. Area
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-339 S 15 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-340 S 10 ES
Muzzle Oct. 17-21 ELK-3-341 S 15 MB
Any Legal Dec. 19-23 ELK-1-342 S 15 MB
Unit 24 including Ft. Bayard Mgmt. Area
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-343 S 5 ES
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only / 
Youth Only
Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-344 S 5 A
Unit 28 McGregor Range Only 1 (CWD detected in this area, see page 28)
Any Legal - 
McGregor range 
only / Military Only
Dec. 12-16 ELK-1-396 HD 10 ES
Any Legal - 
McGregor range 
only
Dec. 12-16 ELK-1-397 HD 10 ES
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
1All hunters and their guests must pay a $100 access fee.
=== page 86 ===
 86 
2026–2027
Unit 29 and 30 (CWD detected in Unit 29, see page 28)
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-398 HD 20 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-399 HD 20 ES
Any Legal Oct. 1-5 ELK-1-400 HD 20 ES
Any Legal Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-401 S 30 ES
Unit 34 (CWD detected in this area, see page 28)
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-345 HD 200 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-346 HD 200 ES
Bow Dec. 19-23 ELK-2-355 S 200 APRE/6/A
Muzzle Oct. 17-21 ELK-3-350 HD 250 ES
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-347 HD 75 ES
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only / 
Youth Only
Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-348 S 120 A
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-349 S 50 ES
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-351 HD 150 ES
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-352 S 350 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-1-353 S 350 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 12-16 ELK-1-354 S 350 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Jan. 23-27, ‘27 ELK-1-356 S 200 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Feb. 6-10, ‘27 ELK-1-357 S 200 A
Unit 36
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-358 HD 140 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-359 HD 140 ES
Muzzle Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-360 HD 140 ES
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-361 HD 140 ES
Any Legal Oct. 31-Nov. 4 ELK-1-362 HD 140 ES
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-1-363 S 100 A
Elk
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 87 ===
  87 
2026–2027
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 12-16 ELK-1-364 S 100 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Jan. 23-27, ‘27 ELK-1-365 S 100 A
Unit 37
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-402 HD 40 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-403 HD 30 ES
Bow Dec. 5-9 ELK-2-407 S 50   APRE/6
Any Legal Oct. 1-5 ELK-1-404 HD 30 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-405 HD 30 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-406 S 45 A
Unit 38
Any Legal Oct. 1-5 ELK-1-408 S 10 ES
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-409 S 10 ES
Unit 39 and 43
Any Legal Oct. 1-5 ELK-1-410 S 30 ES
Units 42, 47 and 59
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2- 411 HD 13 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-412 S 13 ES
Any Legal Oct. 1-5 ELK-1-413 S 13 ES
Unit 45
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-366 HD 75 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-367 HD 73 ES
Muzzle Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-368 HD 136 MB
Muzzle - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 14-18 ELK-3-371 S 49 A
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-369 S 140 MB
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-370 S 140 MB
Unit 48
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-372 HD 80 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-373 HD 80 ES
Muzzle Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-374 S 60 MB
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 88 ===
 88 
2026–2027
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-375 S 75 MB
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-376 S 64 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 14-18 ELK-1-377 S 50 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-1-378 S 54 A
Unit 49
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-379 HD 60 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-380 HD 59 ES
Any Legal Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-381 S 77 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-382 S 76 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 7-11 ELK-1-383 S 77 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 14-18 ELK-1-384 S 77 A
Unit 50
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-187 S 60 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-188 S 55 ES
Any Legal Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-189 S 120 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-190 S 125 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 7-11 ELK-1-191 S 42 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 21-25 ELK-1-192 S 45 A
Unit 51
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-193 HD 180 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-194 HD 180 ES
Muzzle Dec. 5-9 ELK-3-201 S 145 ES
Any Legal Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-195 HD 220 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-196 HD 220 MB
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-197 S 220 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 7-11 ELK-1-198 S 251 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 14-18 ELK-1-199 S 251 A
Elk
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 89 ===
  89  
2026–2027
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 21-25 ELK-1-200 S 252 A
Unit 52
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-202 HD 230 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-203 HD 230 ES
Muzzle - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-204 S 50 MB
Muzzle Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-205 HD 120 MB
Muzzle - NM 
Resident Only
Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-206 S 50 A
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-207 HD 230 MB
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-208 HD 230 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only / 
Youth Only
Nov. 14-18 ELK-1-209 S 80 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only / 
Mobility Impaired 
Only
Nov. 21-25 ELK-1-210 S 56 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 21-25 ELK-1-211 S 73 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 5-9 ELK-1-212 S 115 A
Unit 53
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-385 S 65 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-386 HD 60 ES
Muzzle - Excluding 
Cerro portion
Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-387 HD 50 ES
Any Legal - 
Excluding Cerro 
portion
Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-388 HD 80 MB
Any Legal - 
Excluding Cerro 
portion
Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-389 S 131 MB
Any Legal - 
Excluding Cerro 
portion / NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 14-18 ELK-1-390 S 94 A
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 90 ===
 90 
2026–2027
Any Legal - 
Excluding Cerro 
portion / NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 21-25 ELK-1-391 S 94 A
Unit 54 and 55A Colin Neblett WMA (NM Residents Only)
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-425 S 10 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-426 S 10 ES
Muzzle Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-427 S 20 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-428 S 20 MB
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-429 S 20 MB
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 ELK-1-430 S 20 A
Unit 55A ES Barker WMA Only (NM Residents Only)
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-431 S 5 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-432 S 5 ES
Any Legal Oct. 10-14 ELK-1-433 S 10 MB
Unit 55A Urraca WMA Only (NM Residents Only)
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-434 S 5 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-435 S 5 ES
Muzzle Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-436 S 10 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-437 S 10 MB
Any Legal Nov. 7-11 ELK-1-438 S 10 MB
Any Legal Nov. 14-18 ELK-1-439 S 15 A
Any Legal Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-440 S 15 A
Unit 55A Valle Vidal Only1 (Once-in-a-Lifetime)
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-441  Q/HD 25 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-442  Q/HD 25 ES
Muzzle Oct. 10-14 ELK-3-443  Q/HD 20 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-444 Q/HD 35 MB
Any Legal Oct. 24-28 ELK-1-445  Q/HD 30 MB
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Oct. 31-Nov. 4 ELK-1-446  Q/HD 20 MB
Elk
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
1Hunters may hold either an ES or an MB Once-in-a-Lifetime and Once-in-a-Youth license. In addition, 
hunters may hold an Antlerless Once-in-a-Lifetime and Once-in-a-Youth license.
=== page 91 ===
  91 
2026–2027
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only / 
Youth Only
Nov. 7-11 ELK-1-447 Q 30 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 14-18 ELK-1-448 Q 30 A
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Nov. 21-25 ELK-1-449 Q 30 A
Unit 56
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-414 S 5 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-415 S 5 ES
Any Legal Oct. 1-5 ELK-1-416 S 10 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-417 S 10 A
Unit 57 Sugarite Canyon State Park Only
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-418 S 3 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-419 S 2 ES
Units 57 and 58 Excluding Sugarite Canyon State Park
Bow Sept. 1-14 ELK-2-420 S 5 ES
Bow Sept. 15-24 ELK-2-421 S 5 ES
Any Legal Oct. 1-5 ELK-1-422 S 5 MB
Any Legal Oct. 17-21 ELK-1-423 S 10 MB
Any Legal - NM 
Resident Only
Dec. 12-16 ELK-1-424 S 10 A
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
NMDOW photo, 
Dela Joyner
=== page 92 ===
 92 
2026–2027
Youth Encouragement Hunts 
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Youth Encouragement Elk Hunts: Online Purchase Only
Only eligible resident youth hunters who have submitted a valid application for a 
deer, elk, pronghorn, ibex, oryx, Barbary sheep or bighorn sheep draw hunt in the 
current license year and were unsuccessful in drawing any license for these species 
will be eligible to purchase a youth encouragement elk license during the first 14 
days of availability on the NMDOW  website. Licenses remaining after 14 days shall 
be available to any youth hunter eligible to purchase an elk license, whether they 
applied for draw hunts or not. 
Hunts will only be offered online on a first-come, first-served basis. Hunts will be 
available online until 14 days before each hunt start date. PLEASE NOTE: rejected 
draw applicants are ineligible. For more information call the NMDOW Information 
Center: 1-888-248-6866 .
Youth Encouragement Elk Licenses
The number of licenses available for these hunts may be adjusted based on 
changes in population levels and harvest rates. License fee: $67 resident, $563 
non-resident.
Hunt Dates Hunt Code Fee Type Licenses Bag Limit
Unit 5B
Any Legal - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-100 S 20 A
Unit 6A
Any Legal - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-101 S 50 A
Any Legal - Youth Only Dec. 26-30 ELK-1-102 S 50 A
Unit 6C
Any Legal - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-103 S 50 A
Any Legal - Youth Only Dec. 26-30 ELK-1-104 S 50 A
Unit 10
Any Legal - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-105 S 35 A
Unit 13
Muzzle - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-3-106 S 60 A
Muzzle - Youth Only Dec. 26-30 ELK-3-107 S 60 A
Unit 15
Muzzle - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-3-108 S 75 A
Muzzle - Youth Only Dec. 26-30 ELK-3-109 S 75 A
Unit 16A
Any Legal - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-110 S 75 A

=== page 93 ===
  93 
2026–2027
DON'T SHOOT!DON'T SHOOT!
Most wildlife is legally protected and may be hunted only with a license  
during open seasons. This includes occasional visitors such as moose, jaguars, 
red deer and many other non-native and exotics species.
Z If you see a species that is not typically found in New Mexico,  
it is likely protected and may NOT be hunted.
NMDOW photo of a moose 
that  roamed into Santa Fe  
in the summer of 2023.
ALWAYS contact your local Conservation Officer before you hunt or kill an unusual animal seen in the wild.
Any Legal - Youth Only Dec. 26-30 ELK-1-111 S 75 A
Unit 16C
Any Legal - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-112 S 75 A
Any Legal - Youth Only Dec. 26-30 ELK-1-113 S 75 A
Unit 16D
Any Legal - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-114 S 75 A
Any Legal - Youth Only Dec. 26-30 ELK-1-115 S 75 A
Unit 16E
Any Legal - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-116 S 75 A
Any Legal - Youth Only Dec. 26-30 ELK-1-117 S 75 A
Unit 17
Muzzle - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-3-118 S 60 A
Muzzle - Youth Only Dec. 26-30 ELK-3-119 S 60 A
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 94 ===
 94  
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Youth Encouragement Hunts 
Unit 34
Any Legal - Youth Only Dec. 26-30 ELK-1-120 S 125 A
Unit 36
Any Legal - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-121 S 80 A
Any Legal - Youth Only Dec. 26-30 ELK-1-122 S 80 A
Unit 49
Any Legal - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-123 S 50 A
Unit 51
Any Legal - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-124 S 105 A
Any Legal - Youth Only Dec. 26-30 ELK-1-125 S 105 A
Unit 52
Any Legal - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-126 S 50 A
Unit 53
Any Legal - Youth Only Nov. 28-Dec. 2 ELK-1-127 S 60 A
Any Legal - Youth Only Dec. 26-30 ELK-1-128 S 60 A
Make memories that  Make memories that  
will last a lifetimewill last a lifetime ..
Mentor-Youth Hunting Program
wildlife.nm.dgf.gov/education/hunter-education  
505-222-4731  
New Mexico Department of Wildlife
Conserving New Mexico’ s Wildlife for Future Generations
=== page 95 ===
  95 
2026–2027
Pronghorn
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
General Information
• License Requirements and Fees (see pages 12–17).
• All Pronghorn Harvests Must Be Tagged (pages 37).
• Legal Sporting Arms for Pronghorn Hunting (specified by hunt code,  
see page 30).
• Hunting on Military Reservations (see page 46).
• Mobility-impaired Hunts (see pages 19–20).
• Youth-Only Hunts (see page 19).
• It is Legal to Harvest a Marked Animal (see page 9).
Pronghorn Draw Licenses
The deadline to apply for pronghorn licenses is March 18, 2026. Up to four hunters 
may apply per application.
Successful applicants will be mailed a public-land pronghorn license/ tag unless the 
E-Tag option is chosen. The license includes a hunt code and description of the unit, 
sporting-arm type, season dates and bag limit. T ags include instructions for proper 
tagging.
Bag Limits 
(see glossary, pages 160–163)
MB A pronghorn with at least one horn longer than its ears.
F–IM Any female pronghorn or any male pronghorn without horns or with both horns 
shorter than its ears.
ES Either sex (any one pronghorn).
Private-Land Only Pronghorn Licenses  
Private-land pronghorn license sales  
are limited in GMUs 41, 42, 47, 56, 57, 58 and 59.
To hunt on private land only, hunters must obtain a Private-Land Only Pronghorn 
License and Tag, available at NMDOW offices, license vendors, or online and 
by telephone. Online and telephone purchases must be made at least 14 days prior 
to the hunt start date to allow mailing of tags . When obtaining a Private-Land 
Only Pronghorn License, the hunter must select a hunt code corresponding with a 
public-land pronghorn draw hunt code for the unit(s), bag limit, sporting arm type 
and season date. Public-land draw hunt codes are listed on pages 97-104. Written 
permission from the landowner is required while hunting. Hunt codes for units 
without corresponding public-land draw hunts or with limited license numbers 
on private-land hunts are listed on page 96-97. Over-the-counter, Private-Land 
Pronghorn Licenses are not valid on any public land.
=== page 96 ===
 96  
2026–2027
Pronghorn
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Private-Land Pronghorn Hunting in Units 4, 14, 41, 42, 46, 47, 48, 50, 52, 54, 
55, 56, 57, 58 and 59.
Private-land hunters in these units must select one of the hunt codes listed below.
Hunt Dates Hunt Code Fee Type Licenses Bag Limit
Unit 4
Muzzle - Youth Only Aug. 1-3 ANT-3-300 S Unlimited ES
Bow Aug. 4-12 ANT-2-301 S Unlimited MB
Muzzle Aug. 22-24 ANT-3-303 S Unlimited MB
Units 4, 50 and 52
Any Legal Aug. 15-17 ANT-1-302 S 15 MB
Unit 14
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-304 S Unlimited MB
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-305 S Unlimited MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-306 S Unlimited MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-307 S Unlimited MB
Unit 41
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-212 S 3 MB
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-213 S 3 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-214 S 95 MB
Any Legal Sep. 26-28 ANT-1-215 S 64 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sep. 26-28 ANT-1-216 S 3 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-217 S 22 MB
Unit 42
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-219 S 3 MB
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-220 S 3 ES
Any Legal Sep. 26-28 ANT-1-221 S 22 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-222 S 26 MB
Unit 46
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-308 S Unlimited MB
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-309 S Unlimited ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-310 S Unlimited MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-311 S Unlimited MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-312 S Unlimited MB
=== page 97 ===
  97 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Unit 47
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-225 S 3 MB
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-226 S 3 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-227 S 30 MB
Any Legal Sep. 26-28 ANT-1-228 S 22 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sep. 26-28 ANT-1-229 S 3 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-230 S 10 MB
Unit 48
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-313 S Unlimited MB
Any Legal -  
Youth Only
Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-314 S Unlimited ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-315 S Unlimited MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-316 S Unlimited MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-317 S Unlimited MB
Unit 54
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-318 S Unlimited MB
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-319 S Unlimited ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-320 S Unlimited MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-321 S Unlimited MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-322 S Unlimited MB
Unit 55
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-323 S Unlimited MB
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-324 S Unlimited ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-325 S Unlimited MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-326 S Unlimited MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-327 S Unlimited MB
Unit 56
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-236 S 8 MB
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-237 S 6 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-238 S 182 MB
Any Legal Sep. 26-28 ANT-1-239 S 110 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sep. 26-28 ANT-1-240 S 3 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-241 S 74 MB
=== page 98 ===
 98 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Pronghorn
Unit 57
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-243 S 3 MB
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-244 S 5 ES
Any Legal Sep. 26-28 ANT-1-245 S 28 MB
Unit 58
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-247 S 4 MB
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-248 S 3 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-249 S 104 MB
Any Legal Sep. 26-28 ANT-1-250 S 41 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sep. 26-28 ANT-1-251 S 3 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-252 S 30 MB
Unit 59
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-254 S 3 MB
Any Legal - Youth 
Only
Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-255 S 6 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-256 S 124 MB
Any Legal Sep. 26-28 ANT-1-257 S 67 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sep. 26-28 ANT-1-258 S 3 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-259 S 43 MB
Pronghorn Conservation Recognition Program (PCRP)
The PCRP allows private landowners to apply for alternative season hunt dates as 
approved by NMDOW. Landowners must conduct and maintain substantial habitat 
improvements and/or land management practices that directly and significantly 
benefit pronghorn. A PCRP application and conservation management plan are 
required. To participate or for more information, contact NMDOW  at 505-476-8038 .
Ranch-wide Agreements
Ranch-wide agreements allow private landowners to enroll their ranch’s private-
deeded and public-leased acres as one contiguous ranch for access by public draw 
hunters. Landowners are issued authorizations for pronghorn licenses valid on that 
property’s deeded and public-leased acres. To participate or for more information, 
contact NMDOW at 505-476-8038 .
Pronghorn Draw Hunts
A Public-Land Pronghorn Draw License authorizes the hunter to hunt on any open 
public land within the specified unit(s) or hunt area, on participating ranches with 
signed NMDOW ranch-wide hunting agreements, or on any other private land in the 
unit(s), with written permission from the landowner of the property.
=== page 99 ===
  99  
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Hunt Dates Hunt Code Fee Type Licenses Bag Limit
Units 2, 7, 9 and 10
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-100 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-101 S 3 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-102 S 5 MB
Unit 12
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-103 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-104 S 3 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-105 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-106 S 10 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-107 S 10 MB
Unit 13
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-108 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-109 S 2 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-110 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-111 S 10 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-112 S 5 MB
Unit 15
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-113 S 20 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-114 S 5 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-115 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-117 S 3 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-118 S 10 MB
Unit 16
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-119 S 20 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-120 S 5 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-121 S 15 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-123 S 3 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-124 S 25 MB
Unit 17
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-125 S 20 MB
1 White Sands Missile Range (WSMR) ONLY, mandatory check-in/check-out. WSMR will charge a $70 per 
hunter access fee; 50% military discount applies. Successful WSMR applicants will receive an email from 
WSMR with instructions for fee payment. Hunters are responsible for timely payment and will not be allowed 
to hunt if the access fee has not been paid by the specified deadline.
=== page 100 ===
 100 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Pronghorn
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-126 S 5 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-127 S 5 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-128 S 5 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-129 S 3 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-130 S 10 MB
Unit 18
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-131 S 25 MB
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-132 S 15 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-133 S 15 MB
Unit 19 White Sands Missile Range 1
Any Legal - WSMR 
Only / Youth Only
Oct. 2-4 ANT-1-134 S 5 ES
Unit 20
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-135 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-136 S 2 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-137 S 10 MB
Units 21 and 24
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-138 S 25 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-139 S 10 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-140 S 5 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-141 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-142 S 8 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-143 S 15 MB
Units 22 and 23
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-144 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-145 S 5 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-146 S 5 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-147 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-148 S 3 MB
Units 25, 26 and 27
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-149 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-150 S 5 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-151 S 5 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-152 S 10 MB
1 All hunters and their guests must pay a $100 access fee.
=== page 101 ===
  101 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-153 S 3 MB
Unit 28
1
 McGregor Range Only 
Muzzle Sept. 5-6 ANT-3-154 S 7 MB
Muzzle -  Military Only Sept. 5-6 ANT-3-155 S 7 MB
Unit 29
Muzzle - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-3-156 S 5 ES
Muzzle Aug. 29-31 ANT-3-157 S 15 MB
Muzzle Sept. 26-28 ANT-3-158 S 25 MB
Unit 30
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-159 S 25 MB
Unit 31 North of US Highway 380
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-160 S 25 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-161 S 5 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-162 S 5 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-163 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-164 S 5 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-165 S 15 MB
Unit 31 South of US Highway 380
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-166 S 50 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-167 S 5 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-168 S 10 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-169 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-170 S 5 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-171 S 20 MB
Unit 32 East of Pecos River
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-172 S 25 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-173 S 5 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-174 S 10 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-175 S 5 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-176 S 5 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-177 S 15 MB
Unit 32 West of Pecos River
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-178 S 20 MB
=== page 102 ===
 102 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Pronghorn
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-179 S 15 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-180 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-181 S 5 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-182 S 15 MB
Any Legal - (Roswell 
Hunt Area only)
Dec. 1-15 ANT-1-183 S 15 F-IM
Unit 33
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-184 S 30 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-185 S 5 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-186 S 25 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-187 S 20 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-188 S 5 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-189 S 25 MB
Units 36 and 37
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-190 S 20 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-191 S 5 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-192 S 10 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-193 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-194 S 5 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-195 S 15 MB
Unit 38
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-196 S 20 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-197 S 10 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-198 S 15 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-199 S 20 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-200 S 10 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-201 S 30 MB
Unit 39
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-202 S 5 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-203 S 5 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-204 S 10 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-205 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-206 S 5 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-207 S 10 MB
=== page 103 ===
  103 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Unit 40
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-208 S 5 MB
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-209 S 10 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-210 S 5 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-211 S 10 MB
Unit 41
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-212 S 28 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-213 S 4 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-214 S 24 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-215 S 24 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-216 S 4 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-217 S 28 MB
Unit 42
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-219 S 4 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-220 S 8 ES
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-221 S 8 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-222 S 8 MB
Units 8 and 43
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-223 S 5 MB
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-224 S 10 MB
Unit 47
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-225 S 8 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-226 S 4 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-227 S 20 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-228 S 24 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-229 S 4 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-230 S 28 MB
Units 50 and 52
Bow Aug. 4-12 ANT-2-233 S 20 MB
Muzzle - Youth Only Aug. 1-3 ANT-3-232 S 40 ES
Muzzle Aug. 22-24 ANT-3-235 S 40 MB
Any Legal - Not 
available for OTC 
private land licenses
Aug. 15-17 ANT-1-234 S 20 MB
=== page 104 ===
 104  
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Pronghorn
Unit 56
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-236 S 40 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-237 S 40 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-238 S 4 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-239 S 36 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-240 S 4 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-241 S 40 MB
Unit 57
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-243 S 4 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-244 S 4 ES
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-245 S 4 MB
Unit 58
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-247 S 32 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-248 S 16 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-249 S 24 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-250 S 24 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-251 S 4 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-252 S 32 MB
Unit 59
Bow Aug. 15-23 ANT-2-254 S 40 MB
Any Legal - Youth Only Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-255 S 36 ES
Any Legal Aug. 29-31 ANT-1-256 S 4 MB
Any Legal Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-257 S 32 MB
Any Legal - Mobility 
Impaired Only
Sept. 26-28 ANT-1-258 S 8 MB
Any Legal Oct. 3-5 ANT-1-259 S 40 MB
NMDOW photo, 
Dela Joyner
=== page 105 ===
  105 
2026–2027
... restore habitat.
More than 120 years conserving New Mexico’s wildlife for future generations
manage newly completed construction enhancements to wetland habitat and associated 
infrastructure on more than 800 acres of wetlands on Bernardo Wildlife Area.
sustain 1,250 acres of wetland habitat and 4 miles of riparian habitat along the Pecos River.
maintain approximately 250,000 acres throughout New Mexico.
produce 900 acres of agricultural crops for wintering waterfowl and other wildlife.
At the New Mexico 
Department of Wildlife, we ...
=== page 106 ===
 106  
2026–2027
General Information
• License Requirements and Fees (see pages 12–17).
• All Bighorn Sheep Harvests Must Be Tagged (page 37).
• Legal Sporting Arms for Bighorn Sheep Hunting (specified by hunt code, 
see page 30).
• Hunting on Military Reservations (see page 46).
• Mobility-impaired Hunts (see pages 19–20).
• Youth-Only Hunts (see page 19).
• Bag Limit (see glossary, page 159).
• It is Legal to Harvest a Marked Animal (see page 9).
Draw Licenses for Rocky Mountain and Desert Bighorn Sheep
The deadline to apply for Bighorn Sheep Draw Licenses is March 18, 2026. Only 
one hunter may apply per application. Successful applicants will be mailed a bighorn 
sheep license/tag unless the E-Tag option is chosen. The license includes a hunt 
code and description of the unit, sporting-arm type, season dates and bag limit. T ags 
include instructions for proper tagging.
Hunters are eligible to draw one Rocky Mountain bighorn sheep ram license and 
one desert bighorn sheep ram license in a lifetime. A person who has held a license 
to hunt a desert bighorn sheep ram may apply for a draw license to hunt a Rocky 
Mountain bighorn sheep ram and vice versa.
Youth hunters (17 years or younger on the first day of the hunt) are eligible to draw 
one youth-only Rocky Mountain bighorn sheep ram license and one youth-only 
desert bighorn sheep ram license.
Hunters may apply for up to three bighorn sheep (BHS) hunt codes in the same 
license year. Hunters applying for both desert and Rocky Mountain bighorn must do 
so on the same application.
Bighorn Sheep Ram Heads Must Have a Seal
All bighorn sheep rams taken in New Mexico must have a seal inserted in one horn 
by NMDOW. Sealing must occur within 10 days of harvest or prior to leaving New 
Mexico, whichever occurs first. Bighorn sheep heads may not be possessed without 
a receipt from NMDOW. Bighorn sheep heads found in the field must remain where 
found. Bighorn sheep heads brought into New Mexico must be sealed by NMDOW 
within 10 days of entry into the state (NMDOW will seal unsealed out-of-state heads 
only if origin can be verified). Bighorn sheep legally harvested and sealed by another 
jurisdiction (state, tribal entity or country) do not have to be resealed by NMDOW. 
Application Procedure for Bighorn Sheep (BHS) Hunts 
Hunts are divided into four BHS hunt codes (BHS-1-201, BHS-1-202, BHS-2-203 and  
BHS-1-204). Applicants may choose up to three hunt codes. 
Hunt Areas and Hunt Dates:  Each BHS hunt code lists the available hunt areas and 
hunt dates for that hunt code. For each BHS hunt code chosen, applicants may select 
up to three hunt areas and hunt dates for that hunt code.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Bighorn Sheep
=== page 107 ===
  107 
2026–2027
Rocky Mountain Bighorn Ram: Hunt Code BHS-1-201 
Big-Game Sporting Arms
Hunt Area Hunt Dates Licenses Bag Limit
GMUs 6A and 6C (Jemez) Aug. 10-24 2 Ram
GMUs 6A and 6C (Jemez) Sept. 1-15 1 Ram
GMUs 16B, 22, 23, 24 (San Francisco River / Turkey Creek) Jan. 1-31, '27 2 Ram
GMU 45 (Pecos) Aug. 7-16 5 Ram
GMU 45 (Pecos) Aug. 21-30 4 Ram
GMU 45 (Pecos) – Youth Only Aug. 21-30 1 Ram
GMU 53 (Wheeler Peak) 1 Aug. 6-15 1 Ram
GMU 53 (Wheeler Peak) 1 Sept. 1-10 1 Ram
GMUs 53 and 55 (Latir) 2 Aug. 7-16 1 Ram
GMUs 53 and 55 (Latir) 2 Aug. 21-30 1 Ram
GMUs 49, 50 and 53 (Rio Grande Gorge) 3, 5 Aug. 10-24 1 Ram
GMUs 49, 50 and 53 (Rio Grande Gorge) 3, 5 Sept. 1-15 1 Ram
GMUs 49, 50 and 53 (Rio Grande Gorge) 3, 5 Nov. 1-15 1 Ram
GMU 58 (Dry Cimarron) 4 Aug. 15-Jan. 
15, '27
2 Ram
1 GMU 53 south of NM 38 and east of NM 522.
2 GMU 53 north of NM 38 and east of NM 522, and GMU 55 south of NM 196 / FS Rd. 1950.
3 Excludes the portion of GMU 53 east of NM 522.
4 Herds in GMU 58 often are dispersed, and rams may not be present year-round. Hunters should 
be prepared to hunt when rams are present. The dates for this hunt are extended as a result. Hunt 
will most likely occur on private land. If considering this hunt, it is advised to contact the NMDOW  
Information Center: 1-888-248-6866 before applying.
5 Some portions of BLM land are closed to hunting (page 45).
6 GMU 55 north of 196/ FS Rd 1950.
Rocky Mountain Bighorn Ewe: Hunt Code BHS-1-202 
Big-Game Sporting Arms
Hunt Area Hunt Dates Licenses Bag Limit
GMU 45 (Pecos) Sept. 19-23 10 Ewe
GMU 45 (Pecos) Oct. 3-7 8 Ewe
GMU 45 (Pecos) – Youth Only Oct. 3-7 2 Ewe
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 108 ===
 108 
2026–2027
Rocky Mountain Bighorn Ewe: Hunt Code BHS-2-203 
Bow Only
Hunt Area Hunt Dates Licenses Bag Limit
GMU 45 (Pecos) Sept. 4-13 10 Ewe
Desert Bighorn Ram: Hunt Code BHS-1-204
Big-Game Sporting Arms
Hunt Area Hunt Dates Licenses Bag Limit
GMUs 13 and 17 (Ladrones) Dec. 1-15 2 Ram
GMUs 13 and 17 (Ladrones) Dec. 16-31 2 Ram
GMU 19 (San Andres) 1 Dec. 14-21 2 Ram
GMU 19 (San Andres) 1 Dec. 27-Jan. 3 '27 2 Ram
GMU 20 South (Caballos) 2 Nov. 16-30 4 Ram
GMU 20 South (Caballos) 2 Dec. 1-15 4 Ram
GMU 20 North (Fra Cristobal) 3 Sept. 11-20 1 Ram
GMU 26 (Little Hatchets) 4 Sept. 15-30 2 Ram
GMU 26 (Little Hatchets) 4 Oct. 1-15 1 Ram
GMU 26 (Big Hatchets) 5 Sept. 15-30 2 Ram
GMU 26 (Big Hatchets) 5 Oct. 1-15 1 Ram
GMU 27 (Peloncillos) Nov. 16-30 1 Ram
1
 Access through the White Sands Missile Range (WSMR) is required for this hunt. In addition to the 
bighorn sheep license fees, validation and stamp fees, WSMR charges a $160  per hunter access 
fee; 50% military discount applies. Successful applicants will receive an instruction email from 
WSMR detailing payment of the fee, including payment deadline. Hunters should anticipate the 
most opportune times to hunt during the 8-day hunt period will be on weekends, non-duty days and 
holidays. Military authorities may delay or cancel hunts. 
2 GMU 20 south of NM 51.
3 GMU 20 north of NM 51. Hunts occur on private land only. Landowner may place restrictions on 
these hunts. For information contact the Armendaris Ranch at: armendarisranch@retranches.com  
or 575-894-6782.
4 GMU 26 west of NM 81
5 GMU 26 east of NM 81
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Bighorn Sheep
=== page 109 ===
  109  
2026–2027
General Information
• License Requirements and Fees (see pages 12–17).
• All Ibex Harvests Must Be Tagged (pages 37).
• Legal Sporting Arms for Ibex Hunting (specified by hunt code,  
see page 30).
• Youth-Only Hunts (see page 19).
• It is Legal to Harvest a Marked Animal (see page 9).
Ibex Draw Licenses 
The deadline to apply for ibex draw licenses is March 18, 2026. Up to two hunters 
may apply per application.
Any valid Ibex Draw License can be used for the year-round IBX–1–528 hunt. 
Successful applicants will be mailed an ibex draw license/ tag unless the E-Tag option 
is chosen. The license includes a hunt code and description of the unit, sporting-arm 
type, season dates and bag limit. T ags include instructions for proper tagging.
Licenses for the IBX–1–101 any legal sporting arm hunt are once-in-a-lifetime. 
A hunter may apply for this once-in-a-lifetime ibex draw license if she/he has not 
previously held an ibex once-in-a-lifetime license. Licenses for IBX–1–103 are once-
in-a-youth. A youth hunter may apply for this once-in-a-youth draw license if she/he 
has not previously held a ibex youth license.
Cougar Hunting in Unit 25, Florida Mountains Hunt Area
Cougar hunting is closed in the Florida Mountains hunt area during any ibex season, 
except by licensed ibex hunters who also possess a cougar license. Cougar hunters 
are restricted to the sporting-arm type and season dates specified on their ibex 
license.
Bag Limit (see glossary, pages 159)
F–IM: Any female ibex, or a male ibex with horns less than 20 inches long.
ES Either sex (any one ibex).
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Ibex
=== page 110 ===
 110 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Ibex Draw Licenses
Hunt Dates Hunt Code Fee Type Licenses
Bag 
Limit*
Unit 25 (Florida Mountains)
Bow Oct. 1-15 IBX-2-100 S 20 ES
Bow Jan. 15-29, '27 IBX-2-104 S 20 ES
Any Legal – 
Once-In-A-Lifetime
Nov. 15-29 IBX-1-101 S 5 ES
Any Legal –  
Once-In-A-Youth
Dec. 27-Jan. 10, 
'27
IBX-1-103 S 1 ES
Florida Mountains Hunt Area
Portion of Unit 25 (shaded): bounded by Interstate 10 on the north; the U.S./Mexico 
border on the south; N.M. Hwy. 11 on the west; and the Doña Ana/Luna County line 
on the east.
Ibex
=== page 111 ===
  111 
2026–2027
Barbary Sheep
General Information
• License Requirements and Fees (see pages 12–17).
• All Barbary Sheep Harvests Must Be Tagged (page 37).
• Legal Sporting Arms for Barbary Sheep Hunting (specified by hunt code, 
see page 30).
• Hunting on Military Reservations (see page 46).
• It is Legal to Harvest a Marked Animal (see page 9).
Barbary Sheep Draw Licenses
The deadline to apply for Barbary sheep draw licenses is March 18, 2026. Up to four 
hunters may apply per application .
Successful applicants will be mailed a Barbary Sheep License/tag unless the E-Tag 
option is chosen. The license includes the hunt code and description of the unit, 
sporting-arm type, season dates and bag limit. Tags include instructions for proper 
tagging.
Bag Limit
ES Either sex (any one Barbary sheep).
F–IM: Any female Barbary sheep, or a male Barbary sheep with horns less than 18 inches long.  
See page 159.
All public draw Barbary sheep licenses (with the exception of McGregor Range 
license holders who are stationed at Fort Bliss, El Paso, Texas and have paid the 
resident fees) shall also be valid for over-the-counter hunt areas with any big-game 
sporting arm. 
Barbary Sheep Draw Hunts
Hunt Dates Hunt Code Fee Type Licenses Bag Limit
Unit 28
1
 McGregor Range Portion of Ft. Bliss
Any Legal Dec. 12-16 BBY-1-116 S 10 ES
Any Legal – Military Only Dec. 12-16 BBY-1-117 S 10 ES
Any Legal Dec. 26-27 BBY-1-118 S 65 F-IM
Any Legal – Military Only Dec. 26-27 BBY-1-119 S 10 F-IM
Any Legal Jan. 2-3, '27 BBY-1-120 S 65 F-IM
Any Legal – Military Only Jan. 2-3, '27 BBY-1-121 S 10 F-IM
Units 29 and 30
Bow Jan. 1-15, '27 BBY-2-108 S 75 ES
Any Legal Oct. 10-16 BBY-1-109 S 75 ES
Any Legal Dec. 4-10 BBY-1-110 S 75 ES
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
1 All hunters and their guests will pay $100 each for access fees.
=== page 112 ===
 112 
2026–2027
Any Legal Dec. 15-21 BBY-1-111 S 75 ES
Any Legal Jan. 20-26, '27 BBY-1-112 S 200 ES
Any Legal Feb. 1-7, '27 BBY-1-113 S 200 ES
Any Legal Feb. 12-18, '27 BBY-1-114 S 200 ES
Any Legal Feb. 21-27, '27 BBY-1-115 S 200 ES
Units 32, 36 and 37
Bow Jan. 1-15, '27 BBY-2-100 S 75 ES
Any Legal Oct. 10-16 BBY-1-101 S 50 ES
Any Legal Dec. 4-10 BBY-1-102 S 50 ES
Any Legal Dec. 15-21 BBY-1-103 S 75 ES
Any Legal Jan. 20-26, '27 BBY-1-104 S 150 ES
Any Legal Feb. 1-7, '27 BBY-1-105 S 150 ES
Any Legal Feb. 12-18, '27 BBY-1-106 S 150 ES
Any Legal Feb. 21-27, '27 BBY-1-107 S 150 ES
Over-the-Counter Licenses
Over-the-Counter Barbary Sheep Licenses for public and private lands are available 
at license vendors, NMDOW  offices, online: https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov  or by 
telephone: 1-888-248-6866 . If planning to hunt within 14 days of online or telephone 
purchase, hunters may be required to obtain tags at a license vendor or NMDOW  
office. Please note: Barbary sheep draw applicants may not purchase the OTC license 
before the draw results are released.
Hunt Dates Hunt Code Fee Type Licenses Bag Limit
Over-the-Counter  (Statewide except on WMAs during closures, WSMR and Fort Bliss 
portions of GMU 19, and the draw areas of GMUs 28, 29, 30, 32, 36 and 37)
Any Legal Apr. 1- 
Mar. 31, '27
BBY-1-300 S Unlimited ES
Barbary sheep hunters in GMU 34 should be aware  
that bighorn sheep may be present (see page 113).
Private-Land Only Barbary Sheep Licenses
To hunt on private land only, hunters must obtain a Private-Land Only Barbary Sheep 
License and Tag—available at NMDOW offices, license vendors, online and by 
telephone. Online and telephone purchases must be made at least 14 days prior to hunt 
start date to allow mailing of tags, unless the E-Tag option is chosen. When obtaining 
a Private-Land Only Barbary Sheep License, the hunter must select a hunt code 
corresponding with a public-land draw hunt code for the unit(s), bag limit, sporting-
arm type(s) and season date. Written permission from the landowner is required while 
hunting.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Barbary Sheep
=== page 113 ===
  113 
2026–2027
Sleek brown/
gray coat
Sleek beard 
and muzzle
Big, 
tightly 
curled 
horns
Big, 
wide- 
arching 
horns
Shaggy beard 
and muzzle
Shaggy, red/
brown coat
BIGHORN SHEEP BARBARY SHEEP
CHECK AGAIN!
Young bighorn  
ram horns
can look similar  
to Barbary sheep  
ewe and young rams
KEY DIFFERENCES:
ALL bighorns have 
white rumps and 
ALL Barbary sheep 
have shaggy beards 
and muzzles 
It is illegal to kill a bighorn sheep with a Barbary sheep hunting license. 
Likewise, it is illegal to kill a Barbary sheep with a bighorn sheep license. 
Know the difference!  
For more information, examples and a quiz, visit the Wild Sheep Foundation at 
wildsheepfoundation.org/field-identification-desert-bighorn-aoudad
1
1 1
1
 1
1
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
NMDOW and Wild Sheep Foundation photos
=== page 114 ===
 114  
2026–2027
Oryx
General Information
• License Requirements and Fees (see pages 12–19).
• All Oryx Harvests Must Be Tagged (pages 37).
• Legal Sporting Arms for Oryx Hunting (specified by hunt code,  
see page 30).
• Hunting on Military Reservations (see page 46).
• Mobility-impaired Hunts (see pages 19–20).
• Youth-Only Hunts (see page 19).
• It is Legal to Harvest a Marked Animal (see page 9).
Oryx Draw Licenses
The deadline to apply for oryx draw licenses is March 18, 2026. Up to two hunters 
may apply per application. The majority of these hunts occur on the White Sands 
Missile Range (WSMR). Successful applicants will be mailed an oryx license/tag 
unless the E-Tag option is chosen.
All once-in-a-lifetime , broken-horn and youth-only oryx hunts are three-day hunts. 
Friday will be primarily for checking into WSMR. If no military missions are 
scheduled, hunting may be allowed on Friday afternoons after check-in. Additional 
information concerning Friday opportunities will be emailed to each license holder.
WSMR will charge a $185 per hunter access fee and Ft. Bliss will charge a $100 
access fee for each hunter and guest; 50% military discount applies. Successful 
WSMR applicants will receive an email from WSMR with instructions for fee 
payment. Hunters are responsible for timely payment and will not be allowed to hunt 
if the access fee has not been paid by the specified deadline. Military authorities may 
delay, shorten or cancel hunts.
Bag Limit
ES Either sex (any one oryx). 
BHO Any broken-horn oryx (missing a minimum of 25% of one horn). See page 159 .
White Sands Missile Range (WSMR) Security
Hunters who successfully draw a WSMR hunt, and their guests, must first complete 
a security-background check to be allowed on WSMR. Security-background 
registration forms will be emailed in advance to all successful license holders prior 
to the hunt. All hunters and guests must have completed forms approved prior to 
being allowed access to WSMR. Vehicles entering WSMR are subject to search by 
WSMR security officers. 
WSMR bans all alcoholic beverages, camcorders, radar detectors and concealed 
weapons. Discovery of banned items and/or failure to comply with WSMR 
requirements or other laws and regulation can result in revocation of hunting 
privileges on WSMR. If escorted off WSMR, license fees are nonrefundable.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 115 ===
  115 
2026–2027
Special Restrictions
•  White Sands Missile Range Hunter Education Requirement: All hunters, regardless of age, 
on white Sands Missile Range (WSMR) in GMU 19 are required to have proof of passing a 
state-certified Hunter Education course. Mentor-youth hunters are not eligible.
•  All WSMR draw oryx hunts with an either-sex bag limit are once-in-a-lifetime hunts and 
may not be applied for if previously held . If another oryx license type that is not once-in-
a-lifetime has been previously held, applicants remain eligible and may still apply for once-
in-a-lifetime hunts. 
• For eligibility questions call: 1-888-248-6866.
•  Successful applicants will receive an email from WSMR with instructions for check-in and 
check-out at WSMR. A hunt-area map will be provided at check-in to identify closed areas 
where no hunting will be allowed. WSMR applicants should ensure that the email and phone 
number are correct in their NMDOW account.
•  No more than three guests may accompany each licensed hunter to assist in cleaning and 
loading a downed oryx. Only U.S. citizens may be guests of permitted hunters, unless the 
guest(s) of an approved foreign-national hunter with an official escort. No additional help for 
cleaning and loading will be available. Guests may not help the licensed hunter kill the oryx.
• Foreign nationals may apply for once-in-a-lifetime hunts; if drawn they must be escorted at 
all times by an authorized WSMR official while on WSMR.
• Blaze-orange clothing: Hunters and their guests must wear at least 144 square inches of 
blaze-orange clothing while hunting on WSMR. 
Outfitted Hunts: WSMR allows use of outfitters and guides for oryx once-in-
a-lifetime, broken-horn, youth-only and mobility-impaired hunts only. Only those 
outfitters and guides registered with WSMR in advance of the hunt will be allowed 
to operate on the range. Outfitters and guides are not authorized for population-
management hunts. It is the hunter’s responsibility to verify that an outfitter or guide 
is in compliance with WMSR policies. For further information about registration 
requirements contact WSMR at: 575-678-7909 or 575-678-2225.
Once-in-a-Lifetime Hunts
Unit 19 Hunt Dates Hunt Code Fee Type Licenses Bag Limit
Stallion Range Sept. 4-6 ORX-1-100 S 70 ES
Rhodes Canyon Sept. 18-20 ORX-1-101 S 70 ES
Stallion Range Oct. 30-Nov. 1 ORX-1-103 S 70 ES
Rhodes Canyon Nov. 13-15 ORX-1-104 S 70 ES
Stallion Range Jan. 8-10, '27 ORX-1-105 S 70 ES
Rhodes Canyon Jan. 22-24, '27 ORX-1-106 S 70 ES
Stallion Range Feb. 5-7, '27 ORX-1-107 S 70 ES
Rhodes Canyon Feb. 19-21, '27 ORX-1-108 S 70 ES
Stallion Range March 5-7, '27 ORX-1-109 S 70 ES
Stallion Range – 
Mobility Impaired Only
Oct. 2-4 ORX-1-110 S 20 ES
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 116 ===
 116  
2026–2027
Resident Veteran Once-in-a-Lifetime Hunt
This hunt has been established for New Mexico resident veterans. No more than two 
people may apply on each application. Application must be made by March 18, 2026 . 
Proof of Military Service Required:  Applicants must provide their DD-214 
demonstrating honorable discharge to verify eligibility prior to application.  
The DD-214 can be emailed: special.hunts@dgf.nm.gov ,  
faxed: 505-476-8180 , or mailed to: NMDOW, Special Hunts Office, One Wildlife 
Way, Santa Fe, NM 87507. 
Hunt Area Hunt Dates Hunt Code Fee Type Licenses Bag Limit
White Sands Missile Range (WSMR)*  – Resident Veterans Only, Once-in-a-Lifetime
Any Legal – Rhodes Canyon Oct. 16-18 ORX-1-102 S 75 ES
*Resident veteran hunters who have held a once-in-a-lifetime oryx license may not apply.
Youth-only Hunt (Once-in-a-Youth Hunt)
Any Legal – Stallion Range / 
Youth Only
Oct. 2-4 ORX-1-111 S 40 ES
Broken-Horn Oryx Hunts*
Any Legal – Stallion Range Sept. 4-6 ORX-1-112 S 15 BHO
Any Legal – Rhodes Canyon Sept. 18-20 ORX-1-113 S 15 BHO
Any Legal – Stallion Range Oct. 30-Nov. 1 ORX-1-114 S 15 BHO
Any Legal – Rhodes Canyon Nov. 13-15 ORX-1-115 S 15 BHO
Any Legal – Stallion Range Jan. 8-10, '27 ORX-1-116 S 15 BHO
Any Legal – Rhodes Canyon Jan. 22-24, '27 ORX-1-117 S 15 BHO
Any Legal – Stallion Range Feb. 5-7, '27 ORX-1-118 S 15 BHO
Any Legal – Rhodes Canyon Feb. 19-21, '27 ORX-1-119 S 15 BHO
Any Legal – Stallion Range Mar. 5-7, '27 ORX-1-120 S 15 BHO
*Hunters who have held a once-in-a-lifetime oryx license may apply for a broken-horn oryx hunt.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Oryx
Call 1-888-248-6866 to find out 
about discounted licenses and  
special hunting opportunities  
for active military and veterans!
Thank you
for your service!
=== page 117 ===
  117 
2026–2027
McGregor Range Portion of Ft. Bliss Hunts (These are not Once-
in-a-Lifetime Hunts.) Hunts are on lands administered by Fort Bliss. All hunters may 
apply for ORX–1–225 and ORX–1–227. Applicants for military-only hunts must 
submit proof of current active-duty status prior to application each year. Veterans, 
reservists and military contractors are not eligible for military-only hunts. Fort Bliss 
charges a $100 per person access fee for all hunters and their guests. See page 46 for 
more information.
Hunt Dates Hunt Code Fee Type Licenses Bag Limit
Unit 28 McGregor Range Portion of Ft. Bliss
Any Legal Dec. 19-20 ORX-1-225 S 25 ES
Any Legal – Military Only Dec. 19-20 ORX-1-226 S 25 ES
Any Legal Jan. 2-3, '27 ORX-1-227 S 25 ES
Any Legal – Military Only Jan. 2-3, '27 ORX-1-228 S 25 ES
Off-Range Hunts (These are not Once-in-a-Lifetime Hunts)
Open Areas:  Lands administered by the Forest Service, BLM, State Trust Land and 
private property with written permission. Closed Areas:  McGregor Range Portion 
of Ft. Bliss (GMU 28),  Ft. Bliss in GMU 19, White Sands Missile Range, Jornada 
Experimental Range, San Andres National Wildlife Refuge, Holloman Air Force 
Base and other lands closed to hunting.  
Hunt Dates Hunt Code Fee Type Licenses Bag Limit
Statewide (Off-range)
Any Legal Jun. 1-30 ORX-1-204 S 96 ES
Any Legal – Youth Only Jun. 1-30 ORX-1-205 S 24 ES
Any Legal Jul. 1-31 ORX-1-206 S 96 ES
Any Legal – Youth Only Jul. 1-31 ORX-1-207 S 24 ES
Any Legal Aug. 1-31 ORX-1-208 S 96 ES
Any Legal – Youth Only Aug. 1-31 ORX-1-209 S 24 ES
Any Legal Sept. 1-30 ORX-1-210 S 96 ES
Any Legal – Youth Only Sept. 1-30 ORX-1-211 S 24 ES
Any Legal Oct. 1-31 ORX-1-212 S 96 ES
Any Legal – Youth Only Oct. 1-31 ORX-1-213 S 24 ES
Any Legal Nov. 1-30 ORX-1-214 S 96 ES
Any Legal – Youth Only Nov. 1-30 ORX-1-215 S 24 ES
Any Legal Dec. 1-31 ORX-1-216 S 96 ES
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov

=== page 118 ===
 118 
2026–2027
Any Legal – Youth Only Dec. 1-31 ORX-1-217 S 24 ES
Any Legal Jan. 1-31, '27 ORX-1-218 S 96 ES
Any Legal – Youth Only Jan. 1-31, '27 ORX-1-219 S 24 ES
Any Legal Feb. 1-28, '27 ORX-1-220 S 80 ES
Any Legal – Youth Only Feb. 1-28, '27 ORX-1-221 S 20 ES
Any Legal –  
Age 70 and Older
Feb. 1-28, '27 ORX-1-222 S 40 ES
Any Legal Mar. 1-31, '27 ORX-1-223 S 96 ES
Any Legal – Youth Only Mar. 1-31, '27 ORX-1-224 S 24 ES
Population Management Hunts (These are not Once-in-a-Lifetime Hunts.)
Oryx population management hunts may occur off WSMR or be restricted to WSMR 
only. 
Off WSMR (excluding WSMR and Ft. Bliss):  Applicants should choose the 5th-
choice oryx hunt option when applying, and leave all other options blank. 
WSMR only: To be eligible for population management oryx hunts on WSMR, 
applicants must choose the 5th-choice oryx hunt option when applying for draw 
hunts and must enter an authorization code from an approved 2026 WSMR security 
sponsor. Sponsors must apply for and be approved for a WSMR security-sponsor 
permit by Feb. 15, 2026. Only U.S. citizens may apply for WSMR population 
management hunts.  
Do not select any WSMR options unless you have a valid hunt authorization code. 
Hunters unaccompanied by a sponsor will be denied access to the hunt. If uncertain 
about your eligibility, please call NMDOW: 1-888-248-6866 . 
Private-Land Hunts  
(These are not Once-in-a-Lifetime Hunts)
Private-Land Oryx Licenses are valid only on deeded private 
land. Hunters must possess written permission from the 
landowner. Private-Land Oryx Licenses must correspond to 
the hunt dates, eligibility requirements/restrictions, sporting-
arm type and bag limits listed for the statewide, off-range 
hunts listed on page 117. 
Statewide private-land, off-range licenses are also available 
for April (ORX–1–2000) and May (ORX–1–2020). Licenses 
are available at NMDOW offices and license vendors, online:  
https://onlinesales.wildlife.state.nm.us/ , or by telephone: 
1-888-248-6866 . Online and telephone purchases must be 
made at least 14 days prior to hunt start date to allow mailing 
of tag unless the E-Tag option is chosen. Please note: Oryx 
draw applicants may not purchase a Private-Land License before the draw results are 
released.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Oryx
NMDOW photo
=== page 119 ===
  119  
2026–2027
Turkey
General Information
• License Requirements and Fees (see pages 12–17).
• All Turkey Harvests Must Be Tagged (pages 37).
• Legal Sporting Arms for Turkey Hunting (shotguns, bows or crossbows, 
see page 30).
• Youth-Only Hunts (see page 19).
• It is Legal to Harvest a Marked Animal (see page 9)
• It is illegal to shoot a turkey on a roost.
Turkey Draw Permits 
The deadline to apply for turkey draw permits is Feb. 11, 2026. Up to two hunters may 
apply per application. Successful applicants must purchase an over-the-counter  
Turkey License to validate their draw permit. Licenses may be purchased online at  
https://onlinesales.wildlife.state.nm.us , by telephone: 1-888-248-6866 , or in person 
at NMDOW offices or from license vendors. Online and telephone purchases must be 
made at least 14 days prior to hunt start date to allow mailing of tags unless the E-Tag 
option is chosen. Draw hunt areas are open only during the dates listed on the permit. 
If planning to hunt within 14 days of online or telephone purchase, hunters may be 
required to obtain tags at a license vendor or NMDOW office. 
Spring Over-the-Counter (OTC) License Hunts
OTC turkey licenses are available at NMDOW offices, license vendors, online or by 
telephone: 1-888-248-6866 . Hunters may purchase both spring and fall licenses.
Turkey hunts in the Sandia Ranger District portion of GMU 14 and in Sugarite 
Canyon State Park are bow and crossbow only. 
Areas Open for Spring OTC License Hunts: April 15–May 15 
STATEWIDE: Except the following CLOSED AREAS:  Unit 2A (areas east of U.S. 
Hwy. 550 and north of NM Hwy. 173); Unit 2B (areas in the Carson National Forest), 
Unit 2C (areas in the Carson National Forest); Units 6B, 8, 19, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 
31; Bernardo WMA, Jackson Lake WMA, La Joya WMA, Marquez/LBar WMA, 
Prairie Chicken WMAs, Red Rock WMA, Valle Vidal and W.S. Huey WMA.
Youth-Only Spring OTC License Hunt: April 10-12
An early youth-only turkey hunt is available April 10-12 in all open units for spring 
hunting. Draw-permit areas are not open for youth-only spring OTC license holders.
Bag Limit for Spring Season
The bag limit is two bearded turkeys, except in permitted areas. Turkey draw 
permit holders may kill only the number of turkeys authorized on their permit in the 
permitted area. If only one turkey is allowed, they may hunt in any open over-the-
counter area during the spring season for a second turkey. The beard and a patch of 
feathers surrounding the beard must remain on the bird until it is delivered to the 
place where it will be eaten or placed in final storage. 
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 120 ===
120 
2026–2027
Turkey Draw Permit Seasons  
(Purchase of OTC Turkey License Required)
Hunt Dates Hunt Code Licenses Bag Limit
Units 2B & 2C Carson National Forest
Any Legal Apr. 15-May 15 TUR-1-100 115 1 bearded turkey
Any Legal - Youth Only Apr. 15-May 15 TUR-1-101 50 1 bearded turkey
Unit 2A (Areas east of Hwy. 550 and north of NM Hwy. 173)
Any Legal - Youth Only Apr. 15-May 15 TUR-1-102 5 1 bearded turkey
Unit 6B Valles Caldera National Preserve 1
Any Legal Apr. 15-30 TUR-1-103 20 1 bearded turkey
Unit 8
Any Legal2 Apr. 15-May 15 TUR-1-104 15 2 bearded turkeys
Unit 9 Marquez/LBar WMA Only
Any Legal - NM Resident Only Apr. 15-May 15 TUR-1-105 15 1 bearded turkey
Units 26 & 27 (Gould's Turkey)
Any Legal - Once-in-a-Lifetime May 1-30 TUR-1-106 4 1 bearded turkey
Units 55A Valle Vidal
Any Legal EAST SIDE:  
Apr. 15 - May 15
WEST SIDE:  
Apr. 15 - Apr 30
TUR–1–109 20 1 bearded turkey
1Hunter orientation required
2Bow and crossbow only in Sandia Ranger District portion
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Turkey
Fall OTC License Hunts
Sept. 1–30  (bow only) and Nov. 1–30 (shotgun, bow or crossbow) 
STATEWIDE: Except the closed areas listed below.
CLOSED: Unit 2A (areas east of U.S. Hwy. 550 and north of NM Hwy. 173); Unit 2B 
(areas in the Carson National Forest); Unit 2C (areas in the Carson National Forest); 
Units 6B, 8, 14, 18, 19, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 33, 38, 49, 50, 53; Bernardo WMA, Bill 
Evans WMA, Edward Sargent WMA, Jackson Lake WMA, La Joya WMA, Lake 
Roberts WMA, Marquez/LBar WMA, Prairie Chicken WMAs, Red Rock WMA, Rio 
Chama WMA, Sugarite Canyon State Park, Valle Vidal and W.S. Huey WMA.
Bag Limit for Fall Season
The bag limit is any one turkey. If a hunter does not harvest a turkey during the 
September bow-only hunt, she/he may hunt again in November using legal sporting 
arms for turkey. 
=== page 121 ===
 121 2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
    2026 Bosque del Apache National Wildlife Refuge 
Youth Spring Turkey Hunt Suspended
Bosque del Apache National Wildlife Refuge (NWR) is suspending the youth
turkey hunt this spring 2026 season. For more information about hunting
opportunities at Bosque del Apache NWR call: 575-835-1828  or
https://www.fws.gov/refuge/bosque-del-apache . 
New Mexico Turkey Distribution
=== page 122 ===
 122 
2026–2027
Javelina
General Information
• License Requirements and Fees (see pages 12–17).
• All Javelina Harvests Must Be Tagged (pages 37).
• Legal Sporting Arms for Javelina Hunting (specified by hunt code,  
see page 30).
• Hunting on Military Reservations (see page 46).
• Youth-Only Hunts (see page 19).
• It is Legal to Harvest a Marked Animal (see page 9).
Javelina Draw Licenses
The deadline to apply for javelina draw licenses is March 18, 2026 . Up to four 
hunters may apply per application. Successful applicants will be mailed a Javelina 
License/Tag unless the E-Tag option is chosen. 
OTC Licenses: Licenses and tags are available at NMDOW  offices, license 
vendors, online and by telephone. Online and telephone purchases must be made at 
least 14 days prior to hunt start date to allow mailing of tags unless the E-Tag option 
is chosen.
WMAs open to javelina hunting:  Heart Bar, Double E, River Ranch, Red 
Rock (outside of the high-fence bighorn sheep enclosure only), Sandhills Prairie 
Conservation Area, and Prairie-Chicken WMAs including Black Hills (East 
and West), Claudell, Crossroads 1–5, Gallina Wells (1, 1A, 1B and 2–6), Liberty, 
Marshall, Milnesand, Bluitt (North, South and East), Wayside, Antelope Flats, 
Bledsoe, Little Dipper, Pitchfork and Ranger Lake.
JAV-1-100, JAV-1-104 and JAV-2-103 Hunts: Javelina will be in small, isolated 
groups except in Units 23–27.  
Draw Hunts Hunt Dates Hunt Code Quality Licenses Bag Limit
Bow – Units 19, 23-27 Jan. 1-31, '27 JAV-2-101 S 330 ES
Any Legal – Statewide except 
GMU 28 / Youth Only
Feb. 1-Mar.31, '27 JAV-1-100 S 180 ES
Any Legal – Units 19, 23-27 Feb. 1-Mar.31, '27 JAV-1-102 S 1100 ES
Any Legal1 – Unit 28 
McGregor Range / Military 
Only
Dec. 26-27 JAV-1-105 S 5 ES
Any Legal1 – Unit 28 
McGregor Range
Dec. 26-27 JAV-1-106 S 5 ES
Over-the-Counter Statewide (excluding GMUs 19, 23-28)
Bow – Statewide (excluding 
Units 19, 23-28)
Jan. 1-31, '27 JAV-2-103 S 360 ES
Any Legal – Statewide 
(excluding Units 19, 23-28)
Feb. 1-Mar. 31, '27 JAV-1-104 S 1200 ES
1 Fort Bliss charges a $100 per person access fee for all hunters and their guests.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 123 ===
  123 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Bear
General Information
• License Requirements and Fees (see pages 12–17).
• All Bear Harvests Must Be Tagged (pages 37).
• Legal Sporting Arms for Bear Hunting (see page 30).
• Youth-Only Hunts (see page 19).
• Bear Licenses must be purchased at least two calendar days before 
hunting.
• It is Legal to Harvest a Marked Animal (see page 9).
Restrictions and Requirements
Bear Licenses must be purchased at least two calendar days before hunting. 
Bag Limit: The bag limit is one bear. No cub younger than one year old or any 
female accompanied by a cub(s) may be taken. 
Closed Areas:  Rio Grande Wild and Scenic River Area, including Taos Valley 
Overlook, and unit 6B ( Valles Caldera National Preserve). 
Electronic Calls: Electronic calls are allowed for bear hunting.   
Bear Management Zones and Harvest Limits (map, page 127): New Mexico is 
divided into Bear Management Zones, enabling NMDOW to better manage regional 
bear populations. Each zone has two harvest limits: 1) the total number of bears that 
may be harvested (total limit); and 2) the number of female bears that may be harvested 
(female limit). Harvest limits for each Bear Management Zone are listed in the table on 
page 125-126. Bear management zones close when harvests reach 90% of the total limit, 
90% of the female limit, or when the season has ended—whichever occurs first.
Bow Only: Sandia Ranger District in Zones 8 and 14, and the draw hunt in Sugarite 
Canyon State Park. 
Zone Closure: Before hunting, hunters must verify their preferred zone is  
still open. Check online: https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/hunting/information-by-animal/
big-game/bear/ or call: 1-877-950-5466.
Pelt Tags Required: Harvested bears must be both carcass tagged and pelt tagged. 
The carcass tag must be properly notched and attached immediately after the animal 
is harvested. The hunter must present the carcass tag, skull and hide for pelt tagging to 
any conservation officer or any NMDOW office within five days of killing the bear 
before the pelt can be frozen, processed, tanned or salted by a taxidermist or before 
transporting the hide outside New Mexico, whichever occurs first. Hunters who 
appoint a designee to transport the harvested bear for pelt tagging are required 
to contact a conservation officer prior to pelt tagging to receive a designee code.
Hunters or their designees are required to present the unfrozen skull of any bear 
killed with the mouth fixed open for removal of a premolar tooth. Hunters or their 
designee must provide all required information at the time of pelt tagging including, 
but not limited to: sex of the animal and date and location of harvest. The pelt tag must 
remain attached to the hide until the hide is processed. Improperly tagged hides will be 
seized by NMDOW.
=== page 124 ===
 124  
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Proof of Sex: The testicles, penis and/or baculum of a male, or the vulva of a 
female, must remain naturally attached to the hide and be visible to the NMDOW  
tagging official. NMDOW will pelt tag a harvested bear only if proof of sex is 
attached to the hide and readily visible to the tagging official. Bears presented to 
NMDOW for tagging without proof of sex attached will be seized. 
Use of Dogs: Dog use is not allowed on wildlife management areas (WMAs) or 
during September bow seasons. Dog use is allowed to hunt bears elsewhere during 
hunts for any legal sporting arm (see table, page 125). When dogs are used to hunt 
bears, the licensed hunter who harvests the bear must be present continuously from the 
time any dog is released. Dogs may be released only during legal hunting hours. There 
is no pursuit or training season outside the regular open season.
Baiting and Trapping: Baiting and trapping are not legal methods for taking bear. 
If accidentally trapped, the bear must be released. For assistance releasing a bear, 
contact NMDOW.
Valle Vidal and Wildlife Management Areas: It is unlawful to hunt bears on the 
Valle Vidal or WMAs, with the following exception: hunters with a valid deer or elk 
license, or bear draw permit, who also possess a valid bear license. Licensed deer and 
elk hunters or bear draw permit hunters may hunt bears in the Valle Vidal or WMAs 
provided they: 1) possess a valid deer or elk license or bear draw permit for the Valle 
Vidal or WMA; 2) possess a bear license; 3) use the sporting arm type specified for 
their bear draw, deer or elk hunt; 4) hunt only during the dates of their bear draw, deer 
or elk hunt; and 5) the harvest limit in the bear zone has not been met. Dogs are not 
allowed on WMAs. Dogs are allowed on the Valle Vidal during the April 15-May 20 
and the Aug. 1-31 hunts. 
Livestock Damage: Landowners, lessees or their regular employees do not need a 
license to kill a bear that has killed domestic livestock or presents an immediate threat 
to human life or property. Any person taking such action must report the incident 
to NMDOW within 24 hours. Pelts, claws and other parts of depredating animals 
taken under this provision are the property of the State of New Mexico and must be 
delivered to NMDOW.
Over-the-Counter (OTC) License Hunts
An OTC Bear License is required to hunt bears in New Mexico, including to validate 
draw permits. Licenses may be purchased online at https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov , by 
telephone: 1-888-248-6866, or in person at NMDOW  offices or from license vendors. 
If planning to hunt within 14 days of online or telephone purchase, hunters may 
be required to obtain tags at a license vendor or NMDOW  office, unless the E-Tag 
option is chosen.
Bear
=== page 125 ===
  125 
2026–2027
Over-the-Counter Seasons
Zone: Open Units Hunt Dates Sporting Arm Dog Use
Total  
Limit
Female 
Limit
Zone 1 Units 4–7, 51, 52 168 67
Sept. 1–24 Bow Only Not Allowed
Sept. 25–Nov. 15 Any Legal Allowed
Zone 2 Unit 2 15 6
Sept. 1–24 Bow Only Not Allowed
Sept. 25–Nov. 15 Any Legal Allowed
Zone 3 Units 49, 50, 53 65 26
Aug. 16–31 Any Legal Allowed
Sept. 1–24 Bow Only Not Allowed 
Sept. 25–Nov. 15 Any Legal Allowed
Zone 4 Units 45, 46, 48 109 43
Aug. 16–31 Any Legal Allowed
Sept. 1–24 Bow Only Not Allowed
Sept. 25–Nov. 30 Any Legal Allowed
Zone 5 Units 54, 55, 57 108 43
Aug. 16–31 Any Legal Allowed
Sept. 1–24 Bow Only Not Allowed
Sept. 25–Nov. 15 Any Legal Allowed
Zone 6 Units 39–43, 47, 56, 
58, 59 51 20
Aug. 16–31 Any Legal Allowed
Sept. 1–24 
Sept. 25–Nov. 15
Bow Only 
Any Legal
Not Allowed 
Allowed
Zone 8 Unit 8 11 4
Sept. 1–24 Bow Only Not Allowed
Oct. 15–Nov. 15 Any Legal * Allowed
Zone 9 Units 9, 10 36 14
Aug. 16–31 Any Legal Allowed
Sept. 1–24 Bow Only Not Allowed
Sept. 25–Nov. 15 Any Legal Allowed
Zone 10 Units 12, 13, 15–18, 
20–24, 26, 27 197 79
Sept. 1–24 Bow Only Not Allowed
Sept. 25–Dec. 15 Any Legal Allowed
Zone 11 Units 37, 38 36 14
Aug. 16–31 Any Legal Allowed
Sept. 1–24 Bow Only Not Allowed
Sept. 25–Nov. 30 Any Legal Allowed
Zone 12 Unit 34 33 13
Aug. 16-31 Any Legal Allowed
Sept. 1–24 Bow Only Not Allowed
Sept. 25–Dec. 15 Any Legal Allowed
* USFS Sandia Ranger District is bow only.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 126 ===
 126  
2026–2027
Zone: Open Units Hunt Dates Sporting Arm Dog Use
Total  
Limit
Female 
Limit
Zone 13 Unit 36 16 6
Aug. 16-31 Any Legal Allowed
Sept. 1–24 Bow Only Not Allowed
Sept. 25–Nov. 30 Any Legal Allowed
Zone 14 Unit 14 19 7
Sept. 1–24 Bow Only Not Allowed
Oct. 15–Nov. 15 Any Legal Allowed
Bear Draw Permits (OTC Bear License required)
Deadline to apply for bear draw permits is Feb. 11, 2026 . Only one hunter may apply 
per application.
Successful applicants must purchase an over-the-counter Bear License to validate 
their draw permit. Licenses may be purchased online at https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov , 
by telephone: 1-888-248-6866, or in person at NMDOW  offices or from license 
vendors. Online and telephone purchases must be made at least 14 days prior to hunt 
start date to allow mailing of tags unless the E-Tag option is chosen. 
Bear draw permits are available for the areas listed in the table below. Only New 
Mexico residents may apply for WMA bear draw permits. Hunters may hunt during 
the over-the-counter season if they have not taken a bear during their draw hunt. 
During draw hunts, dogs are prohibited on WMAs and Sugarite Canyon State Park, 
and are allowed only on the Valle Vidal.
Bear Draw Seasons
Date Hunt Code Permits 
Unit 2
Any Legal – Youth Only Aug. 1–31 BER–1–100 5
Unit 4 Sargent WMA Only
Any Legal – NM Resident Only Aug. 1–31 BER–1–101 10
Unit 4 Humphries WMA Only
Any Legal – NM Residents Only Aug. 1–31 BER–1–102 5
Unit 9 Marquez/LBar WMA Only
Any Legal – NM Resident Only Aug. 1–31 BER–1–103 10
Units 54 and 55A Urraca, E.S. Barker and Colin Neblett WMAs, and Valle Vidal 
Any Legal Aug. 1–31 BER–1–104 60
Unit 55A Valle Vidal Only
Any Legal Apr. 15–May 20 BER–1–105 20
Unit 57 Sugarite Canyon State Park Only
Bow Aug. 1–31 BER–2–106 5 
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Bear
=== page 127 ===
  127  
2026–2027
Bear Management Zones and Game Management Units
0 25 50 75 100
Miles
0 40 80 120 160
Kilometers
Scale: 1:3,200,000
10 Game Management Units
1 Bear Management Zone
1
2 3
4
5
6
89
10
11
12
13
14
§¨¦40
§¨¦40
§¨¦25
§¨¦40
§¨¦10
§¨¦25
1
2A
2B
2C
3
4
5A 5B
6A
6B
6C
7
89
10
11
12 13
14
15
16A
16B
16C
16D
16E
17
18
19
2021A
21B
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39 40
41
42
43
45
46
47
48
49
50
51A51B
52
53
54
55A
55B 56
57
58
59
Albuquerque
Las Cruces
Santa Fe
Belen
Bernalillo
Lovington
Raton
Ruidoso
Shiprock
Socorro
Taos
Truth Or
Consequences
TucumcariGrants
Alamogordo
Carlsbad
Clovis
Farmington
Gallup
Hobbs
Las Vegas
Roswell
Artesia
Deming
Espanola
Portales
Silver
City
Bear Management Areas 2024
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 128 ===
 128 
2026–2027
2021–2022
General Information
• License Requirements and Fees (see pages 12–17).
• All Cougar Harvests Must Be Tagged (pages 37).
• Legal Sporting Arms for Cougar Hunting (see page 30).
• Hunting on Military Reservations (see page 46).
• Cougar Licenses must be purchased at least two calendar days  
before hunting.
• It is Legal to Harvest a Marked Animal (see page 9).
Over-the-Counter (OTC) Licenses
Cougar licenses must be purchased at least two calendar days before hunting. 
An OTC Cougar License may be purchased at license vendors, NMDOW  offices, 
online: https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov  or by telephone: 1-888-248-6866 . Before 
purchasing an over-the-counter (OTC) Cougar License, hunters must purchase or 
possess a Game-Hunting License or Game-Hunting & Fishing License . If planning 
to hunt within 14 days of online or telephone purchase, hunters may be required to 
obtain tags at a license vendor or NMDOW office. 
Bag Limit: The bag limit is two cougars. No spotted kitten(s) or any female 
accompanied by a spotted kitten(s) may be taken. 
Mandatory Cougar Identification Course
NMDOW requires all cougar hunters to successfully complete a cougar identification 
course. The cougar ID number is issued upon successful completion of the course 
through your NMDOW online account. 
Cougar Seasons
Statewide Cougar Season: April 1, 2026–March 31, 2027.
Cougar Management Zones and Harvest Limits (map page 131)
New Mexico is divided into Cougar Management Zones, enabling NMDOW to 
better manage regional cougar populations. Each zone has two harvest limits: 1) the 
total number of cougars that may be harvested (total limit); and 2) the number of 
female cougars that may be harvested (female limit). Harvest limits for each Cougar 
Management Zone are listed on page 130. 
Cougar Management Zones will close and hunting will cease when harvests reach 
90% of the total limit, 90% of the female limit or when the season has ended, 
whichever occurs first.
Zone Closures
Before hunting, hunters must verify their preferred zone is still open. Check online:  
https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/hunting/information-by-animal/big-game/cougar  
or call: 1-877-950-5466 .
Baiting and Trapping: Baiting and trapping are not legal methods of taking cougar.  
If accidentally trapped, the cougar must be released. Should assistance be needed to 
release a cougar, contact NMDOW.
Cougar
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 129 ===
  129  
2026–2027
2021–2022
Pelt Tags Required
Harvested cougars must be both carcass tagged and pelt tagged. The carcass tag 
must be properly notched and attached immediately after the animal is harvested. 
The hunter must present the carcass tag, skull and hide for pelt tagging to any 
conservation officer or NMDOW office within five days of killing the cougar 
before the pelt can be frozen, processed, tanned or salted by a taxidermist, or 
before transporting the hide outside New Mexico, whichever occurs first. Hunters 
who appoint a designee to transport the harvested cougar for pelt tagging are 
required to contact a conservation officer to receive a designee code prior to pelt 
tagging. Hunters or their designee are required  to present to any NMDOW office 
the unfrozen skull of any cougar killed with the mouth fixed open for removal of a 
premolar tooth. Hunters or their designee must provide all required information at 
the time of pelt tagging including, but not limited to: sex of the animal and date and 
location of harvest. The pelt tag must remain attached to the hide until the hide is 
processed. Improperly tagged hides will be seized by NMDOW. 
Proof of Sex
The testicles, penis and/or baculum of a male, or the vulva of a female, must remain 
naturally attached to the hide and be visible to the NMDOW tagging official. 
NMDOW will pelt tag a cougar only if proof of sex is attached to the hide and 
readily visible to the tagging official. Cougar hides presented to the NMDOW for 
tagging without proof of sex attached will be seized.
Livestock Damage
Landowners, lessees and/or their regular employees are not required to have a license 
to kill any cougar that has killed domestic livestock or presents an immediate threat 
to human life or property. Any person taking such action must report the incident 
to NMDOW within 24 hours. Pelts, claws and other parts of depredating animals 
taken under this provision are the property of the State of New Mexico and must be 
delivered to NMDOW.
Use of Dogs 
Dog use is not allowed on wildlife management areas (WMAs) or to pursue cougars 
during September 1–24 bow seasons. Dog use is allowed  to hunt cougars elsewhere 
during hunts for any legal sporting arm. When dogs are used to hunt cougars, the 
licensed hunter who harvests the cougar must be present continuously from the time 
any dog is released. 
Dogs may be released only during legal hunting hours. There is no pursuit or training 
season outside the regular open season. 
Florida Mountains Hunt Area–Unit 25:  Cougar hunting is not allowed in the Florida 
Mountains hunt area during any ibex season, except by licensed ibex hunters (only for 
sporting-arm type and season dates as specified on the ibex license). 
Electronic calls:  Electronic calls are allowed for cougar. 
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 130 ===
 130 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Closed Areas:  Sugarite Canyon State Park; Rio Grande Wild and Scenic River Area, 
including Taos Valley Overlook; Unit 6B (Valles Caldera National Preserve) and Fort 
Bliss including all of Unit 28 and portions of Unit 19.
Wildlife Management Areas:  Cougar hunting by licensed deer and/or elk hunters 
who also possess a valid cougar license is allowed on WMAs and the Valle Vidal 
provided they: 1) possess a valid deer or elk license for the WMA; 2) possess a cougar 
license with tags; 3) use the sporting arm type specified for their deer or elk hunt; 
4) hunt only during the dates of their deer or elk hunt; and 5) the harvest limit in the 
cougar zone has not been met. Dogs are not allowed. 
Cougar Management Zones
Cougar management zone locations in New Mexico are designated in the map on 
page 131.
Zones and Season Limits
Zone Open Units Total Limit Female Limit
A 2, 7 42 13
B 5, 6, 50, 51 25 8
C 43, 45, 46, 48, 49, 53 57 17
D 41, 42, 47, 59 15 5
E 9, 10 43 13
G 13, 17 50 15
H 18, 19, 20 29 9
I 36, 37, 38 24 7
J 15, 16, 21 84 25
K 22, 23, 24 45 14
L 25, 26, 27 19 6
M 31, 32, 33, 39, 40 25 7
N 4, 52 13 4
O 12 17 5
P 56, 57, 58 14 7
Q 28–30, 34 17 6
R 54, 55 26 8
S 8, 14 17 5
Cougar
=== page 131 ===
  131 
2026–2027
Cougar Management Zones and Game Management Units
Cougar Management Zones
GMUs
2021–2022
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 132 ===
 132 
2026–2027
General Information
• License Requirements and Fees (see pages 12–19).
• Legal Sporting Arms (see page 30).
• Hunting on Military Reservations (see page 46).
• It is Legal to Harvest a Marked Animal (see page 9).
Licenses and General Information: 1-888-248-6866
Furbearers
Seasons and General Regulations
Seasons (statewide)
Badger, bobcat, fox, ringtail and weasel November 1, 2026–March 15, 2027
Beaver and muskrat April 1–April 30, 2026; November 1, 2026–March 31, 2027
Nutria April 1, 2026–March 31, 2027
Raccoon - all legal methods April 1–May 15, 2026; September 1, 2026–March 31, 2027
Raccoon - restricted methods May 16–August 31, 2027
(Restricted methods include cage traps, foot-encapsulating traps and hunting). 
It is illegal to set a trap or snare 
on public land
Exceptions: 
■  Cage traps may be used to abate damage caused by any animal to 
property, crops or livestock. 
■  Enrolled members of a federally recognized Indian nation, tribe or 
pueblo may use traps or snares solely for religious or ceremonial 
purposes.
=== page 133 ===
  133 
2026–2027
Public Land
State-owned land, state-leased land, lands held in trust by the state, lands 
administered by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, the United States Forest 
Service, the Bureau of Land Management, the National Park Service, the United 
States Department of Defense, state parks and any county or municipality.
Species with No Open Season
There is no open season to hunt or trap mink, river otter, black-footed ferret, marten, 
Mexican wolf, lynx or coatimundi.
Nutria: Nutria is a nonnative, invasive species that has caused extensive damage to 
wetland and riparian habitat in the United States. Their distribution is restricted in New 
Mexico to the Rio Hondo in Chaves and Lincoln counties. The trapping season for 
nutria is open year-round to prevent population increase and expansion.
Beaver: Hunting or killing any beaver on public land within the Cibola, Lincoln or 
Gila National Forests is prohibited.
Nongame: There is no closed season or bag limit for nongame species such as 
coyotes and skunks; however, hunters and trappers must still abide by NMDOW rules 
regarding trapping and hunting.
State Wildlife Commission Lands
Prairie Chicken WMAs and Water Canyon WMA are open to hunting furbearers, 
coyotes and skunks November 1 to March 15 by hunters holding a valid trapper 
license and HMAV.  All other WMAs are open to hunting furbearers and nongame 
by hunters holding a valid trapper license, HMAV, and written permission from 
NMDOW.
Legal Shooting Hours 
Restricted to the period one-half hour before sunrise to one half -hour after sunset, 
except licensed furbearer hunters who are authorized to hunt for and take raccoons by 
use of artificial light while hunting at night with a rim-fire rifle or handgun no greater 
than .22 caliber, shotgun, bow or crossbow. The artificial light used for raccoon 
hunting must be a headlamp or hand-held flashlight. It is unlawful for any artificial 
light to be cast from a vehicle while raccoon hunting. Licensed trappers may check 
and remove furbearers or nongame from their traps at any time of day.
Legal Methods of Taking Furbearers
Legal methods of taking furbearers include any sporting arm ( see page 30), falconry, 
traps and snares. Dogs are allowed for hunting all furbearers during open season.
Electronic calls are allowed to aid in taking furbearers. Poison may not be used for 
the take of any furbearer. Raccoons may be hunted or trapped during the extended 
season with a current trapper license. Only cage traps and foot encapsulating traps are 
allowed for raccoon trapping during this period.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 134 ===
 134  
2026–2027
Furbearers
Licenses and General Information: 1-888-248-6866
Left: Foothold trap jaw spread. Right: Recessed cubby.  NMDOW photo.
Artificial Light
It is illegal to use a spotlight or any other artificial light to hunt any furbearer (except 
raccoons, see Legal Shooting Hours above) or nongame species including coyotes and 
rabbits, even if you are on private land and have landowner permission, unless you 
have an artificial light permit.
Bag Limits
For furbearer species with an open season, there currently is no bag limit; however, 
NMDOW may set a bag limit for any furbearer species to address significant changes 
in statewide populations or to address critical NMDOW  management needs. 
Catchpoles
A release device or catchpole must be carried by trappers, and all captured animals 
must be removed or released from any trap or snare at the time of check. In cases 
where assistance is required for safe release of the animal, or when biological data is 
sought by NMDOW, the Department must be notified as soon as possible.
Tampering with Traps
It is illegal to destroy, damage, disturb, steal or remove any trap, snare, or trapped 
wildlife without permission of the owner of the trap or snare. However, domestic 
animals caught in traps may be released at any time. New Mexico Law (Chapter 17-2-
7.1, NMSA 1978) prohibits interference with another person who is lawfully hunting, 
trapping or fishing. To report illegal traps or other poaching activity call Operation 
Game Thief: 1-800-432-4263  as soon as possible. Removing or destroying traps (or 
other evidence) prevents officers from prosecuting poachers and is illegal. 
Fur Dealers
A fur dealer license is required for any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business 
of buying or selling unprocessed skins or pelts of any furbearing animal in New Mexico.
Trappers or hunters selling pelts they harvested, and residents who purchase or 
sell less than 50 unprocessed pelts per year are exempt. Fur dealer licenses may be 
purchased only at the NMDOW  Santa Fe Office. To purchase a fur dealer license and 
for additional rules and restrictions please call the Field Operations Division at  
505-476-8064 .
=== page 135 ===
  135 
2026–2027
Licenses and General Information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Swift Fox vs. Kit Fox: Call for Samples
The NMDOW Furbearer Program is interested in working with trappers to collect 
samples from kit and swift fox in Eastern New Mexico to monitor these species 
across the state. Trappers and hunters can assist NMDOW by collecting tissue 
samples (a piece of the foot-pad about the size of a pencil eraser) from any kit 
or swift fox harvested. Samples can be stored in small paper envelopes at room 
temperature or in Ziploc bags in the freezer. Trappers who participate are requested 
to provide detailed location information for each sample, including the GPS 
coordinates (if possible), the county, township and range. Please call or email Nick 
Forman 505-257-8701; Nicholas.Forman@dgf.nm.gov  to arrange for collection of 
your samples.
Trap Restrictions
Restrictions applying to all traps that could reasonably be expected to catch a 
furbearer: This includes traps set for nongame species such as coyotes and skunks.
Marking Traps and Snares
Each trap or snare must be either permanently marked, or have a tag securely 
attached, with an NMDOW -issued user identification number or the name and address 
of the trapper using the trap or snare. Trappers may use either their Trapper ID 
number, if issued, or their Customer Identification Number (CIN) as a trapper ID.
Check Requirements
All land sets must be visually checked every calendar day. Water sets must be checked 
at least once every other calendar day. A licensed trapper may designate an agent to 
check their set traps and snares on alternating check days, but the licensed trapper must 
personally check the traps every other check day. For example, for land sets operating 
Monday through Friday, the trapper checks Monday, Wednesday and Friday and his or 
her agent checks Tuesday and Thursday. Any person may be designated as an agent for 
any licensed trapper, but the agent must possess written permission from the trapper 
and a valid trapper license. The permission must include the licensed trapper’s full 
name and contact information, and the agent must know the location of traps. 
Minimum setback distances
No land set may be made within:
■ 75 feet of a public road or trail
■ 150 feet of a livestock or wildlife catchment, pond or tank containing water
■ 1/2 mile of established and maintained public campgrounds or boat-launching areas, 
occupied dwellings without written permission of the occupant of the dwelling, 
signed and designated roadside rest areas, public picnic areas, and officially 
designated, mapped, maintained and marked trailheads.
=== page 136 ===
 136  
2026–2027
Furbearers
Licenses and General Information: 1-888-248-6866
Size Restrictions - Water Sets
No foothold trap with an inside jaw spread larger than 7 1/2 inches or body-grip 
trap with a jaw spread greater than 12 inches shall be used in making a water set. 
Body-grip traps used in water sets with a jaw spread of eight inches or more must be 
submerged in water to their jaw pivot or deeper.
Size Restrictions - Land Sets
No foothold trap with an outside jaw spread larger than 6 1/2 inches, or 7 inches 
maximum if laminated above the jaw surfaces, or tooth-jawed trap may be used in 
making a land set. No body-grip trap with an inside jaw spread greater than 7 inches 
may be set on land. Body-grip traps with inside jaw spreads of between 6 and 7 inches 
set on land must be recessed in a cubby at least 8 inches from the entrance.
Offsets
All foothold traps with an inside jaw spread equal to or greater than 5 ½ inches used 
in making a land set shall be off-set a minimum of 3/16 of an inch between the contact 
surfaces of the closed jaws, unless they have been constructed or modified so that a 
portion of the jaw is padded with a soft material such as rubber or canvas.
Bait
It is unlawful to place, set or maintain any land set within 30 feet of any bait over two 
ounces in weight which is visible to airborne raptors. Bones that are entirely free of 
flesh are legal.
Swivels
Each foothold trap set on land must have at least two separate swivel points in the 
anchor chain. At least one of these swivel points must be within six inches of the trap.
Anchoring
All traps or snares set on land must use stakes, chains, drags or other anchoring that 
will prevent any furbearer, coyote or wolf caught from escaping with the trap.
Breakaways
Any snare set on land must have a lock or break-away device which is designed to 
release or fail when a maximum of 350 pounds of pressure is applied to it. Locks 
or break-away devices must be attached in a way which leaves no part of the snare 
attached to an animal when it releases or fails. All snares must be securely anchored 
and cannot be attached to a drag. Exception: foot snares.
=== page 137 ===
  137  
2026–2027
Licenses and General Information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Bobcat Pelt Tags
In 1978, NMDOW implemented mandatory bobcat pelt tagging in response to the 
International Union for Conservation of Nature (ICUN) prohibition on export of 
any bobcat pelt out of the United States without a permit from the U.S. Department 
of Interior. Bobcat pelts appear similar to several species of spotted cats which are 
considered endangered in other countries. Bobcats are not threatened or endangered 
in New Mexico or the U.S.; they are abundant in the state and can be found in every 
habitat type.
These regulations are defined by the Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), an international agreement 
between governments to ensure that international trade in plants and wildlife does 
not threaten their survival. CITES specifies that every bobcat harvested in New 
Mexico must have a pelt tag. The NMDOW pelt tagging requirement also allows for 
biological data collection to monitor total harvest, harvest distribution throughout the 
state and bobcat population demographics.
All Bobcats Harvested in New Mexico  
Must Be Pelt Tagged 
Every person who takes a bobcat in New Mexico must present the pelt for tagging in 
New Mexico prior to transporting the pelt out of the state, prior to selling the pelt, or 
no later than April 14, annually, whichever occurs first.
Pelts can be tagged at any NMDOW office or participating fur dealer. Hunters and 
trappers, except residents 11 years of age or younger, must present a current New 
Mexico trapping license at the time of tagging. There is no charge for pelt tagging 
at any location. A list of participating fur dealers is available by contacting the 
NMDOW Furbearer Program: 505-257-8701.
Bobcats taken outside of New Mexico must be tagged in the state where taken and 
will not be tagged in New Mexico.
Be sure your pelt is properly tagged before attempting to sell it. Fur dealers may not 
purchase a pelt that has not been tagged. 
Furbearer auction.   
NMDOW photo

=== page 138 ===
 138 
2026–2027
Licenses and General Information: 1-888-248-6866
Beware of Rabies
In recent years, rabies has been detected in some furbearers in New Mexico. All 
mammals are capable of contracting rabies. Wild animals infected more often 
include skunks, foxes, coyotes, raccoons, bobcats and bats. Trappers should be aware 
of the potential risk of contracting rabies when harvesting an animal. 
Rabies is caused by a virus that can be transmitted to humans through contact with 
the saliva, nervous tissue and/or brain tissue of a rabid animal. Rabies is transmitted 
only if the virus is introduced through a bite, contact with an open cut in the skin, or 
more rarely when infectious material such as saliva from a rabid animal gets into the 
eyes, nose or mouth. Some recommended precautions for trappers include:
•  Wear protective gloves when handling and skinning animals. Open wounds or 
scratches increase the risk of infection when protective gloves are not used.
•  Always err on the side of caution. Use goggles and a skinning apron if possible.
•  Clean tools with a disinfectant such as a 10% bleach solution.
•  Wash thoroughly with soap and water, iodine solution or alcohol solution after han-
dling and skinning animals.
•  If bitten or otherwise possibly exposed to a rabid animal, thoroughly wash the area 
with soap and water and seek medical care as soon as reasonably possible.
•  If attacked or bitten by a potentially rabies-carrying species, the animal may be 
required by law to be tested for rabies, depending on the species and the abil-
ity to retrieve it. Report the incident as soon as reasonably possible to your local 
NMDOW conservation officer for assistance with safely collecting the animal.
• There is no risk of contracting rabies through dried skins, as drying renders the 
virus inactive.
 
Gray fox (right). NMDOW  photo.

=== page 139 ===
  139  
2026–2027
Know the Difference between a Bobcat and a Lynx
Bobcats are common in almost all habitats in New Mexico. Bobcats are closely related 
to the Canada lynx that inhabits the boreal forests of Canada and parts of the northern 
United States. Parts of northern New Mexico are classified as lynx range, and though 
there are no established populations here, transients may occasionally be observed. 
A few key identification characteristics can help distinguish between a lynx and a 
bobcat:
Range: The only potential habitat for lynx is high elevation forests in the San Juan 
and Sangre de Cristo Mountains. If you are not in this area, then you will not see a 
lynx.
Body characteristics:  Lynx have much longer legs in comparison to their body 
size, almost like a bobcat on stilts. They have larger feet for running on top of snow, 
and the tufts on their ears are much longer – often two inches or greater.
Pelage (coat) patterns:  The easiest way to distinguish a lynx from a bobcat, other 
than by its range, is the tail. Depicted in the pictures below, the tip of a bobcat’s tail is 
black on top, and white on the bottom. In contrast, the tip of a lynx’s tail is completely 
black. Another common difference, although there are exceptions, is lynx rarely have 
black spots or bars on the undersides and insides of their limbs.
There is no open season for Canada lynx in New Mexico. Any lynx caught while 
trapping in New Mexico must be released alive, and the incident must be reported to 
NMDOW within 24 hours. If you are not certain whether you have caught a bobcat 
or a lynx, please contact your local conservation officer or the NMDOW Furbearer 
Program: 505-257-8701.
 
Left: Bobcat. NMDOW trail camera.  
Right: Lynx. U.S. Forest Service photo.
Licenses and General Information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Bobcat or Lynx
=== page 140 ===
 140 
2026–2027
Best Management Practices
Licenses and General Information: 1-888-248-6866
Best Management Practices (BMP)
The Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies (AFWA) represents North America’s 
agencies responsible for managing fish and wildlife resources to help advance sound, 
science-based management and conservation of fish and wildlife and their habitats 
in the public interest. AFWA worked with state wildlife management agencies, 
trapping organizations, veterinarians and university researchers to develop BMPs 
for regulated trapping in the United States. This effort was motivated by a desire 
to improve the welfare of wildlife captured by traps, enhance the awareness and 
understanding of modern regulated trapping and sustain regulated trapping as a 
wildlife management technique. Common traps were extensively field-tested and 
evaluated based on five criteria: animal welfare, trap efficiency, trap selectivity, 
trapper and public safety and practical application. Data collection, including safety 
evaluations and was undertaken following widely accepted international standards 
for testing traps from the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). The 
resulting BMPs describe different types of traps, how they work, how traps should be 
set and what training may be needed for people who use BMP traps.
The BMP program has demonstrated with science-based information that many 
models of traps, including footholds, can be used in a humane, selective and efficient 
way. The set of recommendations, one for each of the harvested furbearer species in 
the United States, include practices, equipment and techniques that will continue to 
ensure the welfare of trapped animals, avoid unintended captures of other animals, 
improve public confidence in trappers and wildlife managers and maintain public 
support for trapping and wildlife  
managers.
NMDOW develops regulations on trap types, size and modifications using the 
BMP recommendations. The majority of trappers use BMP recommendations when 
selecting traps, tuning and modifying their traps, and setting them in the field. You 
are strongly encouraged to read the BMPs for the species you trap, and use traps 
found in this resource. Modifications like off-set jaws, laminations, shock-springs 
and swivels improve a trapper’s productivity, ensure welfare of trapped animals and 
improve public confidence in trappers and wildlife managers. 
__________________________________________________
You can find BMPs online at: 
www.fishwildlife.org/afwa-inspires/  
furbearer-management . 
These recommendations have helped improve the humaneness 
and efficiency of traps and increase success when trapping.

=== page 141 ===
  141 
2026–2027
Coyotes (left) and 
Mexican gray wolves 
(right) can be difficult 
to differentiate at a 
distance or at quick 
glance; Mexican 
gray wolves weigh 
two to three times 
more, have larger, 
blocky heads with more-rounded ears, and feet larger in proportion to the body. Not all wolves have radio 
collars. Photo courtesy of the Mexican Wolf Inter-agency Field Team
Wolves Are a Federally Protected Species
The Mexican Wolf Experimental Population Area includes portions of New Mexico. 
Wolves are protected by the federal Endangered Species Act and by the New Mexico 
Wildlife Conservation Act. Federal penalties for shooting a wolf can include a year 
in jail and a $50,000 fine with additional New Mexico state penalties for violating 
the Wildlife Conservation Act. Rewards up to $45,000 for information leading to 
arrest and prosecution of wolf poachers are offered by federal and state agencies 
and conservation organizations jointly. 
It is illegal to:
• Kill or injure a wolf because it is near you or your property.
• Kill or injure a wolf if it attacks your pet.
• Kill or injure a wolf feeding on dead livestock.
• Enter posted closures around release pens, active dens and rendezvous sites.
• Shoot a wolf because of mistakenly identifying it as a coyote or anything else.
However, it is legal to kill, injure or harass a wolf if:
• The wolf is in the act of killing, wounding or biting cattle, sheep, horses, mules, 
burros or dogs owned by you and which are on private or tribal land.
• Acting in defense of human life.
Any person taking such action must report the incident within 24 hours to the 
Mexican Wolf Interagency Field Office: 1-888-459-9653  or the NMDOW 24-hour 
dispatch telephone: 1-800-432-4263 . For more information about Mexican wolves 
and the USFWS Wolf Recovery Program, visit: www.fws.gov/southwest/es/
mexicanwolf.
Wolf Encounters and Identification 
The Gila National Forest and surrounding areas are locations where wolf encounters 
may occur. Mexican gray wolves typically weigh between 50–80 pounds, stand 
28–32 inches at the shoulder and measure 5-½ feet from snout to tail (approximately 
the size of a large German shepherd). Coat color varies, but solid black or white 
Mexican wolves do not occur. .
Mexican Gray Wolf
Licenses and General Information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov

=== page 142 ===
 142 
2026–2027
 142 
General Information
• License Requirements and Fees (see pages 12–17).
• Legal Sporting Arms for Upland Game Hunting (see page 30).
• Hunting on Military Reservations (see page 46).
• Proof of Species, Sex and Bag Limit (See pages 31–32).
• Possession, Donation or Sale of Game (See page 32).
• Use of Dogs (page 32).
Voluntary Harvest Reports
Upland-game hunters are encouraged to submit voluntary harvest reports on 
the Department's online harvest reporting system.
Over-the-Counter Seasons
Hunt Area Season Dates Bag / Possession
Quail  
(Scaled, Gambel’s,  
Bobwhite, Montezuma)
Statewide Nov. 15, '26–Feb. 
15, '27
15 per day, Singly or in aggregate 
(no more than 5 Montezuma 
Quail) / 30 in possession (no 
more than 10 Montezuma quail).
Dusky (Blue) Grouse  NORTH ZONE 
(North of I-40)
Sept. 1–Dec. 31 3 per day / 6 in possession
SOUTH ZONE 
(South of I-40)
Sept. 1-Dec. 31 1 per day / 2 in possession
Squirrel (Abert’s,  
Red, Gray and Fox)
Statewide Sept. 1–Dec. 31 8 per day singly or in aggregate/ 
16 in possession
Pheasant Statewide Dec. 10-13 3 males per day / 6 in possession
Eurasian Collared-Dove Statewide April 1–March 31, '27 Unlimited
State Wildlife Commission WMAs 
State Wildlife Commission owned or managed areas listed below are open to upland-
game hunting. No hunting is allowed outside of open seasons or for species not 
listed. Camping and vehicles are restricted to designated areas. 
Legal Shooting Hours
Shooting hours are one half hour before sunrise to one half hour after sunset, 
except for Bernardo, Casa Colorada, La Joya and W.S. Huey WMAs, where hunting 
hours shall be from one half hour before sunrise to 1:00 p.m. For the special permit 
pheasant hunts on W.S. Huey and Jackson Lake WMAs, hunting hours shall be from 
one half hour before sunrise to half hour after sunset.
Upland Game
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 143 ===
  143 
2026–2027
  143 
2021–2022
Licenses and General Information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Nontoxic Shot Mandatory
Anyone hunting upland game or migratory bird on Bernardo, La Joya or Huey 
WMAs must use and possess only USFWS-approved nontoxic shot. Nontoxic shot 
is not required for any species of upland game, dove, band-tailed pigeon and the 
eastern sandhill crane hunt, on other State Wildlife Commission owned or managed 
properties. 
Nontoxic shot includes:  bismuth-tin, iron (steel), copper-clad iron, iron-tungsten, 
iron-tungsten-nickel, tungsten-bronze, tungsten-iron-copper-nickel, corrosion-
inhibited copper, tungsten-iron polymer, tungsten-tin-iron, tungsten-tin-bismuth, 
tungsten-tin-iron-nickel and tungsten-iron polymer. 
Days Open to Upland-Game Hunting ( • = Days Open) 
It is legal to hunt Eurasian collared doves on WMAs when they are open for 
migratory dove and upland-game hunting seasons.
WMAs Species Sun. Mon. Tue. Wed. Thr. Fri. Sat.
W.S. Huey Quail (during 
quail season) and 
collared dove 
(during dove and 
quail seasons)
• • •
Double E, Marquez/LBar, 
Navajo, Prairie Chicken 
Areas, River Ranch, Socorro-
Escondida and Water Canyon
All upland game 
during quail 
seasons • • • • • • •
Bluebird, Colin Neblett, E.S. 
Barker, Humphries, Pine 
River, Rio Chama, Sargent 
and Urraca
All upland game 
during tree squirrel 
and dusky grouse 
seasons 
• • • • • • •
La Joya (east of the railroad 
tracks), Double E, River 
Ranch, Charette Lake, 
McAllister Lake, Wagon 
Mound, Tucumcari, Hammond 
Tract and Retherford
Mourning, 
white-winged and 
collared dove 
(during dove 
season)
• • • • • • •
NMDOW photo.
=== page 144 ===
 144  
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Upland Game
Draw Pheasant Permits (Resident Only)
Permits (issued by drawing) are required for all pheasant hunts on W.S. Huey and 
for youth-only pheasant hunts on Bernardo and Jackson Lake WMAs. Hunters 
may apply online: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov  or call: 1-888-248-6866 . No more than four 
hunters may apply per application, and no more than two hunters may apply per 
youth-only hunt application. Applications must be submitted by August 12 before 5 
p.m. MDT.  
Bernardo, Jackson Lake and W.S. Huey WMA Youth-only Pheasant Hunts
Three youth-only pheasant hunts are available by drawing. Youth hunters must have 
a Game-Hunting License and be accompanied by a non-hunting adult. 
Hunt Area Hunt Code Season Dates Bag Limit / # of Permits
Bernardo  PHE-0-001 Oct. 17 3 males/ 20
W.S. Huey PHE-0-002 Dec. 5 3 males/ 40
Jackson Lake PHE-0-004 Dec. 5 3 males/ 10
W.S. Huey WMA Pheasant Hunt
A draw-permit hunt open to all applicants will be held at W.S. Huey WMA. Using 
the hunt code listed below, apply online or by telephone. This hunt is open to adult 
and youth hunters. Successful applicants must possess a Game-Hunting License.  
Hunt Area Hunt Code Season Dates Bag Limit/ # of Permits
W.S. Huey PHE-0-003 Dec. 12 3 males/ 40
Falconry Upland-Game Seasons (Statewide) 
Grouse, pheasant, quail, squirrel and Eurasian collared-doves.
Species Season Dates Bag / Possession
Grouse and Pheasant Sept. 1–Feb. 28, '27 3 singly or in aggregate / 6 in possession
Quail Sept. 1–Feb. 28, '27  3 singly or in aggregate / 30 in possession 
Squirrel Sept. 1–Feb. 28, '27 3 singly or in aggregate / 16 in possession
Eurasian collared-dove Apr. 1–Mar. 31, '27 No bag or possession limits
Upland Game Permits
Dog Call-Pen and Field Trial Permits
A $15 permit is required for either a call-pen release or dog field trial.  
Contact NMDOW’s Santa Fe Office for information: 505-476-8064  or  
DGF.Permits@dgf.nm.gov
Shooting Preserve Permits
A shooting preserve permit fee is $200. Contact NMDOW’s Santa Fe office for 
information: 505-476-8064  or DGF.Permits@dgf.nm.gov . 
=== page 145 ===
  145 
2026–2027
2021–2022
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Migratory Game Birds
General Information
• License Requirements and Fees (see pages 12–17).
• Legal Sporting Arms for Migratory Game Birds (see page 31).
• Hunting on Military Reservations (see page 46).
• Proof of Species, Sex and Bag Limit: (see page 31-32).
• Possession, Donation or Sale of Game: (see page 32).
• Use of Dogs: (see page 32).
Voluntary Harvest Reports
Migratory game bird hunters are encouraged to submit voluntary harvest 
reports on NMDOW's online harvest reporting system.
Additional Requirements
For Habitat Stamp, Habitat Management and Access Validation, Harvest Information 
Program Number (HIP) and Duck Stamp requirements, see page 14.
Free Band-tailed Pigeon Permit 
All band-tailed pigeon hunters must possess a Band-Tailed Pigeon Permit. Permits are 
available online: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov, by telephone: 1-888-248-6866 and at NMDOW 
offices and all license vendors.
Free Light Goose Conservation Order Permit 
A Light Goose Conservation Order Permit is required for hunters participating in the 
conservation order hunts Feb. 1–March 10, 2027. Please check the Migratory Game 
Bird Supplement, available in summer, for information on the light goose conservation 
order at https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/home/publications. Permits are available online:  
https://onlinesales.wildlife.state.nm.us, by telephone: 1-888-248-6866 and at 
NMDOW offices and all license vendors.
Free Eastern Sandhill Crane Permit
Each eastern sandhill crane hunter must possess the appropriate license(s) ( page 12),  
plus an Eastern Sandhill Crane Hunting Permit (free). Permits are available online:  
wildlife.dgf.nm.gov , at NMDOW offices and at all license vendors. A federal Duck 
Stamp is not required to hunt sandhill cranes.
This permit allows sandhill crane hunting in Chaves, Curry, De Baca, Eddy, Lea, 
Quay and Roosevelt counties. 
NMDOW photo
=== page 146 ===
 146  
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
General Rules
Nontoxic Shot Mandatory
Hunters must use and possess only USFWS-approved nontoxic shot when hunting 
any waterfowl, coot, gallinules, sandhill crane (draw hunt only), snipe, sora or 
Virginia rail with shotguns (including muzzle-loading shotguns). 
Anyone hunting migratory game birds on Bernardo, La Joya or W.S. Huey WMAs 
must use and possess only USFWS-approved nontoxic shot. Nontoxic shot is not 
required for dove, band-tailed pigeon and the eastern sandhill crane hunt on other 
State Wildlife Commission-owned or managed properties. 
Nontoxic shot includes:  bismuth-tin, iron (steel), copper-clad iron, iron-tungsten, 
iron-tungsten-nickel, tungsten-bronze, tungsten-iron-copper-nickel, corrosion-
inhibited copper, tungsten polymer, tungsten-tin-iron, tungsten-tin-bismuth, 
tungsten-tin-iron-nickel and tungsten-iron-polymer. 
Shooting Hours
Migratory Game Birds: 1/2 hour before sunrise to sunset, unless otherwise noted. 
Bottomless Lakes Overflow: 1/2 hour before sunrise to 1 p.m.
Bernardo, Jackson Lake, La Joya and W.S. Huey: 1/2 hour before sunrise to 1 p.m. 
Exceptions: Shooting hours for the September Teal Season on the Bernardo and La 
Joya areas are from 1/2 hour before sunrise to sunset.
Use of Boats 
It is illegal to shoot at any protected species from within or upon a motor vehicle, 
motor-driven boat, sailboat or aircraft. However, a person may shoot from a motor-
driven boat when the motor has been completely shut off and its progress has 
ceased. 
Federal Regulations
In addition to all New Mexico regulations in this booklet, the following federal 
regulations apply on federal lands when taking, possessing, transporting and storing 
migratory game birds. Persons cited for violating federal regulations will be required 
to appear in federal court. The complete federal regulations (50 CFR-Part 20) are 
available online: ecfr.gov/current/title-50/chapter-I/subchapter-B/part-20?toc=1 
Migratory Game Birds
=== page 147 ===
  147  
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Legal Methods 
Migratory game birds may be taken with the use of artificial decoys, blinds and dogs.
Illegal Methods 
No person shall take migratory game birds:
1. From a sink box (a low floating device that has a depression affording the hunter a 
means of concealment beneath the surface of the water).
2.  From or with the aid or use of a car or other motor-driven land conveyance or from 
or with the aid of any aircraft or drone.
3.  By baiting (placing or directing placement of feed such as corn, wheat, salt, etc. for 
the purpose of causing, inducing or attempting to take any migratory game bird). 
Hunters should be aware a baited area is considered to be baited for 10 days after 
the removal of the bait.
Importation of Harvested Migratory Game Birds
During any one week beginning on Sunday, no person shall import more than: 
1. 25 doves and 10 pigeons from any foreign country. 
2. 10 ducks and 5 geese from any foreign country, except Canada and Mexico. 
3. The Canadian and Mexican export limits for doves and waterfowl, which vary for 
different foreign provinces and states. 
In addition, one fully feathered wing must remain attached to all harvested migratory 
game birds being transported or shipped between a port of entry and one’s home or 
taxidermist. No person shall import harvested migratory game birds belonging to 
another person.
Report All Banded Birds! 
NMDOW requests all banded birds harvested be reported online: reportband.gov.
Regulated Areas
New Mexico State Parks
New Mexico State Parks are closed to all hunting except in designated areas.  
Contact state park superintendents for designated hunting areas and directions 
or call: 1-888-667-2757.
1. Bluewater, Caballo, El Vado, Heron, Conchas, Ute, Elephant Butte and Sum -
ner Lake State Parks:  Open for snipe, sora, Virginia rail and waterfowl.
2. Navajo Lake State Park:  Open for snipe, sora, Virginia rail and waterfowl.  
Closed areas: Navajo Dam stilling basin which includes the area from the crest 
of the bluff above the north bank of the San Juan River to N.M. Hwy. 511 on 
the south side of the river for 1/4 mile downstream from the dam; Cottonwood 
Campground and Day Use Area from the lower boundary of the Quality Waters to 
a fence 1/4 mile downstream from the Cottonwood Day Use Area; Pine and Sims 
Mesa Recreation Area; and Navajo Reservoir Recreation Area south end.
=== page 148 ===
 148 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Migratory Game Birds
National Wildlife Refuges (NWRs)
All state and federal regulations apply. Only USFWS-approved nontoxic shot may 
be used and possessed on refuges. Sporting arms must be unloaded and cased when 
transported. 
Bosque del Apache NWR 
Conducts special permit light goose hunts and allows dove hunting in specific areas. 
For current information, maps and applications, call 575-835-1828 or visit:  
www.fws.gov/refuge/bosque-del-apache/visit-us/activities/hunting.
Las Vegas NWR
Conducts special permit Canada goose hunts and limited dove hunting. For 
information, maps and applications visit: www.fws.gov/refuge/las_vegas/  
or call: 505-425-3581.
=== page 149 ===
  149  
2026–2027
NMDOW photo
2021–2022
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Bitter Lake NWR 
Conducts limited hunting for ducks, geese, coot, sandhill crane and quail.  
For information, maps and applications visit: www.fws.gov/refuge/bitter_lake  
or call: (575) 244-6256.
Sevilleta NWR
Conducts limited hunting for mourning dove, white-winged dove, quail, geese, duck 
and coot. One handicap-accessible duck blind is available first-come, first-served.  
For more information and maps visit: www.fws.gov/refuge/sevilleta  
or call: 505-864-4021.
Wildlife Management Areas
Please check the Migratory Game Bird Supplement, available in summer, for 
information on migratory game bird hunting seasons on WMAs at  
https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/home/publications.
=== page 150 ===
 150 
2026–2027
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
Migratory Game Bird Seasons
Dove and Band-Tailed Pigeon Seasons
Please check the Migratory Game Bird Supplement, available in summer, for 
information on dove and band-tailed pigeon seasons at  
https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/home/publications.
Sandhill Crane Draw 
Permits
Please check the Migratory Game 
Bird Supplement, available online, 
for information on sandhill crane 
draw seasons at  
https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/home/
publications.
Applications may be submitted 
online: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov or 
call: 1-888-248-6866. Applications 
must be submitted by August 
12, 2026 before 5 p.m. MDT. 
Up to four hunters may apply 
per application and up to two 
hunters may apply per youth-only 
hunt application. Nonrefundable 
application fees are $7 per resident 
and $13 per non-resident. Additional information about hunt requirements will be 
given to successful applicants. Each draw-season sandhill crane hunter must have the 
appropriate license(s) (page 12), plus a draw permit. Check the Migratory Game Bird 
Supplement, available in summer, for hunt codes and dates. A federal Duck Stamp is 
not required. Cranes are often found on private property. To access private property, 
hunters must obtain and possess prior written permission.
Eastern Hunt (Eastern)
Chaves, Curry, De Baca, Eddy, Lea, Quay and  Roosevelt counties: All Eastern 
Sandhill crane hunters must possess an appropriate license (page 12), plus a free 
Eastern Sandhill crane permit (page 145). Permits are available online and at all 
license vendors.
Southwest Hunt (SW)
Parts of Sierra, Doña Ana, Luna, Grant and Hidalgo counties:  Bounded on the 
south by the New Mexico/Mexico border; Bounded on the west by the New Mexico 
/ Arizona border north to I-10; Bounded on the north by I-10 east to US 180, north 
to NM 26, east to NM 27, north to NM 152 and east to I-25; Bounded on the east by 
I-25 south to I-10, west to the Luna county line and south to the New Mexico/Mexico 
border.
Migratory Game Birds
NMDOW photo
=== page 151 ===
  151  
2026–2027
2021–2022
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
Hunters who draw special Southwest Crane Permits must return the Harvest 
Questionnaire and Bill Measurement Card to NMDOW no later than five days after 
the end of the permitted hunt dates.
Estancia Valley Hunt (EV)
Portions of Bernalillo, Santa Fe and Torrance counties: Bounded on the west 
by NM 55 starting at Mountainair and north to NM 337, north to NM 14 and north 
to I-25; Bounded on the north by I-25 east to US 285; Bounded on the east by US 
285 south to US 60; Bounded on the south by US 60 from US 285 west to NM 55 at 
Mountainair. Hunters who draw Special Estancia Valley Crane Permits must return 
the Harvest Questionnaire and Bill Measurement Card to NMDOW no later than five 
days after the end of the permitted hunt dates.
Middle Rio Grande Valley (MRGV) Hunts and Resident Youth-Only Hunt 
Hunters who draw Special MRGV Crane Permits must: 1) Check all cranes harvested 
at the designated check station; and 2) File a harvest report no later than five days 
after the end of the permitted hunt dates via the Department’s online licensing 
system or by calling 888-248-6866. For check-station dates, see the Migratory Game 
Birds Supplement. Harvest Questionnaires and hunt letters are available online:  
https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/hunting/information-by-animal/migratory-bird/
Regular draw hunts:  Valencia and Socorro counties only. Bernardo, La Joya and 
Casa Colorada WMAs are closed to crane hunting during regular draw hunts.
Resident Youth-only Hunt:  Youth hunters will be assigned to hunt on either 
Bernardo or Casa Colorada WMAs. 
Maps
Maps of State Wildlife Commission Lands, including La Joya and Bernardo WMAs  
are available at https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/conservation/state-game-commission-
lands
Migratory Game Bird Seasons in the Central and  
Pacific Flyways
Please check the Migratory Game Bird Supplement, available in summer, for 
information on migratory game bird hunting seasons at  
https://wildlife.dgf.nm.gov/home/publications.
=== page 152 ===
2026–2027
Waterfowl Identification 
Mallard ______
Length: 24”
Weight: 2.75 lbs.
Z Eclipse drake  
Z Drake  
Z Hen
Northern pintail  _____________
Length: 26”
Weight: 1.75 lbs.
Z Drake  
Z Eclipse drake 
Z Hen
 
Gadwall  _________
Length: 21”
Weight: 2 lbs.
Z Drake  
Z Eclipse drake 
Z Hen
American wigeon  __________________ 
Length (males): 26”
Length (females):  21”
Weight: 1.75 lbs.
Z Eclipse drake 
Z Hen  
Z Drake
 152  
=== page 153 ===
2026–2027
Northern shoveler _________   
Length: 19.5”
Weight: 1.5 lbs.
Z Drake  
Z Eclipse drake 
Z Hen
Blue-winged teal ____________________
Length: 16”
Weight: 15 oz.
Z Drake  
Z Eclipse drake 
Z Hen
Green-winged teal _______
Length: 15”
Weight: 14 oz.
Z Eclipse drake 
Z Drake  
Z Hen
 
Wood duck __________
Length: 18.5”
Weight: 1.5 lbs.
Z Eclipse drake 
Z Drake  
Z Hen
  153 
=== page 154 ===
2026–2027
Canvasback  ______________________
Length: 22”
Weight: 3 lbs.
Z Drake  
Z Eclipse drake 
Z Hen
Redhead __________
Length: 20”
Weight: 2.5 lbs.
Z Eclipse drake 
Z Drake 
Z Hen
Ringneck  _________
Length: 17”
Weight: 2.5 lbs.
Z Drake  
Z Eclipse drake 
Z Hen
Scaup  _____________________
Length: 18.5”
Weight: 2 lbs.
Z Eclipse Drake 
Z Hen 
Z Lesser Drake  
Z Greater Drake
Waterfowl Identification
 154  
=== page 155 ===
  155 
2026–2027
... ensure safety.
More than 120 years conserving New Mexico’s wildlife for future generations
Provided classroom 
and in-the-field safety 
education for 28,000 New 
Mexico OHV registrants 
and 3,500 non-residents
Conducted 
more than 750 
annual patrols
logged 6,200  
hours for OHV  
Law Enforcement
enforced 
OHV laws 
throughout 
New Mexico 
At the New Mexico 
Department of Wildlife, we ...
 Wear appropriate riding 
safety gear.
 Register your OHV for 
public-land use.
 Tread lightly on 
OHV trails.
 Stay on designated trails — 
no off-roading.
 Prevent wildfires — OHVs 
must be equipped with 
a USFS-approved spark 
arrester.
 Pick up your trash and 
packing it out.
 Prepare and carry a survival 
kit.
 Leave gates as you  
found them.
 Do not harass wildlife  
or livestock.
 Be courteous to  
others on the trail.
For more information go to www.ridenm.dgf.nm.gov
RESPONSIBLE RIDING MEANS:
=== page 156 ===
 156  
2026–2027 156  
wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
what GOODcomes from buying your
NewMexico
       hunting  fishing license?or
Conserve 505 Species of Greatest Conservation 
Need, most of which are not hunted or fished.
Operate six fish hatcheries 
and manage fishing 
opportunities in  
90 fishing waters.
Conserve populations and 
provide hunting opportunities 
for more than 60 game species.
Manage 250k acres of Wildlife 
Management Area lands open to 
recreation for license holders.
Prevent poaching and other wildlife 
crime throughout New Mexico.
Provide conservation education  
and outreach to 100k people annually.
Anyone can buy a license!
=== page 157 ===
  157 
2026–2027
Use this certificate if you give game animals or parts to a person or organization.
I, ____________________________________________________________________________________
Full name of license holder. Please print. 
tel.: (____) ____–______ , Address: ___________________________________________, 
                  Telephone number                                          Address of license holder required. Please print.
on this day: ___/ ___/ ___ at:  ________________________________________________________, 
                        Date of transaction;                                                     Place of transaction.
hereby convey to: ________________________________________   
                                                                                   Full name of person receiving game animal(s) of parts.
the following game animal(s) or parts:
_________________________________________________________________________________,
Detailed description of the kind and number of animals donated or the kind, approximate weight and specific parts donated.  
(Example: one elk hind quarter weighing approximately 75 lbs.) 
for the purpose of:, _______________________________________ ,
                                                                                               Donation, taxidermy and/or meat processing.
taken in GMU ______ under license #: ______________ and taken on: ___/___/___ .
Donor: ________________________________________________________________   
                                                              (Signature of license holder)
Recipient: _____________________________________________________________
                                                                           (Signature of recipient)
By signing we understand and acknowledge to postdate, predate or otherwise falsify a Possession Certificate is unlawfu l.
Possession Certifi cate
New Mexico Department of Wildlife Conserving New Mexico's Wildlife for Future Generations
NewMexico
=== page 158 ===
 158 
2026–2027
Active Duty Military: Individuals currently serving on active duty in the Army, 
Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps or Coast Guard for a minimum period of 90 
days. Members of the National Guard or Military Reserve Component, and 
commissioned officers of the U.S. Public Health Service or National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration who have completed a minimum of six years 
of continuous honorable service also qualify. NM residents qualify for a 50% 
discount on all licenses, permits and stamps.
Antlerless (A) Deer or Elk: Any deer or elk without antlers. 
Antler Point Restricted Elk (APRE/6): Any bull elk with a minimum of six antler 
points on one side.  A brow tine or eye guard constitutes a point; a burr at the 
base does not.
Antler Point Restricted Elk or Antlerless (APRE/6/A): Antler-point-restricted 
elk (six or more points on at least one antler) or an antlerless elk.
Any Legal Sporting Arm: Any firearm, muzzle-loader, compressed air gun, 
shotgun, bow or crossbow. All firearms, except handguns, must be designed to 
be fired from the shoulder. Legal sporting arms for each species are defined on 
page 30-31.
Arrow or Bolt: Only arrows or bolts having broadheads with cutting edges may 
be used, except that “judo,” “blunt” or similar small game points may be used for 
upland game and migratory game bird hunting.  
Bag Limit: The protected species, qualified by, number, sex, age, antler/horn 
requirement, or size allowed by State Wildlife Commission rule that a legally 
licensed person may attempt to take or take. 
Bait: Any salt, mineral, grain, feed, commercially produced game attractant 
or any other organic material which is attractive to wildlife. An area must be 
completely free of bait (including feeders) for at least 10 days prior to hunting. 
[In regards to trapping: The flesh, hide, fur or viscera of any animal. Bones free 
of flesh are not considered bait.]
Baiting: The placing, exposing, depositing, distributing or scattering of any 
bait on or over areas where any person is attempting to take protected game as 
defined in 17–2–3 NMSA 1978.
Big Game: Deer, elk, pronghorn, bighorn sheep, Barbary sheep, oryx, ibex, 
javelina, bear and cougar.
Bighorn Sheep Ewe: Any female bighorn sheep.
Bighorn Sheep Ram: Any male bighorn sheep.
Body-grip trap: A rotating jaw trap designed to capture a furbearer by the body.
Bow: Compound, recurve or long bow, which is not equipped with a mechanical 
device (draw lock) which locks the bow string at full draw. Sights on bows 
shall not project light; however, illuminated pins/reticles and scopes of any 
magnification are allowed. 
Glossary of Terms
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 159 ===
  159 
2026–2027
Broken-horned Oryx: An oryx of either sex that has one or more horn(s) missing 
at least 25% of its normal length. This may be determined by comparing the 
broken horn’s length to the remaining horn or where it is readily apparent the 
terminal end would not taper to a point for another 25% of growth.
Bullet: A single projectile fired from a firearm which is designed to expand or 
fragment upon impact. Tracer or full metal jacket ammunition is not legal for the 
take or attempted take of any big game species.
Cellular or Satellite Camera: Any remote camera which transmits or is capable 
of transmitting images or video wirelessly via a cellular, Wi-Fi or satellite 
connection.
Compressed Air Gun: Handgun or rifle that propels a single, nonspherical 
projectile by compressed air. 
Crossbow: A device with a bow limb or band of flexible material that is attached 
horizontally to a stock and has a mechanism to hold the string in a cocked 
position. Sights on crossbows shall not project light; however, illuminated pins/
reticles and scopes of any magnification are allowed.
Depredation Damage Fee: A fee required of all big-game hunters that is 
included in the price of each big-game license. The fee is $3 for each resident 
and $10 for each non-resident big-game license. Money generated is being 
used to develop permanent solutions to chronic wildlife depredation problems 
throughout the state.
Drone: Any device used or designed for navigation or flight in the air that is 
unmanned and guided remotely or by an onboard computer or onboard control 
system. Drones may also be referred to as “unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV)” or 
“unmanned aerial vehicle systems (UAVS)”.
Either Sex (ES): Any male or female of a big-game species.
Either-Sex White-tailed Deer (ESWTD): Any male or female white-tailed deer.
Falconry: The hunting of game mammals or game birds using raptors.
Female or Immature Barbary Sheep (F–IM): Any female Barbary sheep, or a 
male Barbary sheep with horns less than 18 inches long. 
Female or Immature Ibex (F–IM): Any female ibex, or any male ibex with horns 
less than 20 inches long. This measurement is the length along the top of the 
horn from the base to the tip of the horn (measurement of the longest horn).
Female or Immature Pronghorn (F–IM): Any female pronghorn or any 
pronghorn without horns or with both horns shorter than its ears.
Foot encapsulating trap: Any trap with a push or pull-activated trigger located 
inside an enclosure recessed from an opening of no more than two inches in 
diameter, as measured across the opening from side to side, not corner to corner. 
Foot encapsulating traps include 'dog proof' and 'egg' traps.
Foothold trap: A trap designed to capture a furbearer by the foot, but does not 
include foot encapsulating traps.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 160 ===
 160 
2026–2027
Fork-Antlered Deer (FAD): Any deer possessing an antler which has a definite 
fork showing two or more distinct points. A burr at the base does not constitute a 
point or fork. 
Fork-Antlered Mule Deer (FAMD): Any mule deer possessing an antler which has 
a definite fork showing two or more distinct points. A burr at the base does not 
constitute a point or fork. 
Fork-Antlered White-tailed Deer (FAWTD): Any white-tailed deer possessing an 
antler which has a definite fork showing two or more distinct points. A burr at 
the base does not constitute a point or fork. 
Fourth-Choice Deer or Elk Hunt: A deer or elk draw license that may be issued 
to an applicant who enters a quadrant of the state as a fourth choice on their 
draw application. Applicants do not specifically choose their hunt, they are 
allocated a license for any hunt in the quadrant for the same sporting arm that is 
undersubscribed in the draw. 
Furbearers: Any quadruped defined as a fur-bearing animal in 17-5-2 NMSA 
1978 (muskrat, mink, weasel, beaver, otter, nutria, masked or blackfooted ferret, 
ringtail cat, raccoon, pine marten, coatimundi, badgers, bobcat and all species of 
foxes). Not all furbearers may be taken.
Game-Hunting License: A license that is required to hunt any small game 
species, and to apply for or purchase any big-game or turkey license.   
Game Management Unit (GMU): A subdivision of the state used to manage big-
game species and turkey as described in 19.30.4 NMAC, Boundary Descriptions 
for Game Management Units. 
Habitat Management and Access Validation (HMAV): A validation that must be 
purchased once per license year by all hunters and trappers regardless of land 
status of the location hunted. This validation is not required for hunters, trappers 
and anglers younger than 18 years of age, resident anglers 70 years and older and 
100% disabled resident veterans.
Habitat Stamp (Habitat Improvement Stamp): A U.S. Forest Service and 
BLM management stamp required by all hunters hunting on those lands except 
resident anglers 70 years and older and 100% disabled resident veterans in 
conjunction with their free licenses.
Disabled Hunter: New Mexico resident with a severe physical or developmental 
disability that substantially limits one or more major life activities.
High-Demand (HD) Hunt: An elk or deer draw hunt with at least 22% non-
resident applicants for the previous two license years. Non-residents must pay a 
higher fee (page 17).
Jaw spread: The distance between the jaws when measured across the center of 
the trap and perpendicular to a line drawn through the pivot points of the jaws 
when the trap is set.
Junior Hunting License: A reduced-fee license available to resident hunters 17 
years of age or younger. 
Glossary of Terms
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 161 ===
  161 
2026–2027
Laminated: Any modification to the jaw thickness of a foot-hold trap by 
fastening a strip of metal (rod or flat stock) to the trap jaw, or a trap that is 
manufactured with cast jaws, which increases the contact surface area of the jaw.
Land set: Any foothold trap or snare set on land.
Management Zones (Bear and Cougar): Bear or cougar hunt areas consisting of 
one or more GMUs, as described in 19.31.11 NMAC.
Mature Buck (MB) Pronghorn: A pronghorn with at least one horn longer than 
its ears. 
Mature Bull (MB) Elk: A male elk with at least one brow tine extending six or 
more inches from the main beam or at least one forked antler with both branches 
six or more inches long (spike bulls are not legal, page 163).
Mature Bull / Antlerless (MB/A) Elk: Any male elk with at least one brow tine 
extending six or more inches from the main beam or at least one forked antler 
with both branches six or more inches long (spike bulls are not legal, page 163) or 
any antlerless elk.
Mentor-Youth Hunter Program: This program permits first-time hunters 8–17 
years of age to hunt under the supervision of a licensed adult hunter before 
completing a Hunter Education course. For information see page 24.
Migratory Game Bird: White-winged and mourning doves, American coot, 
band-tailed pigeon, gallinules, snipe, ducks, geese, sandhill crane, sora and 
Virginia rail. Hunting swans in New Mexico is not allowed.
Military-Only Hunt: Hunts available to applicants on full-time active duty in the 
military that have provided proof of current military assignment to the Special 
Hunts Office in Santa Fe prior to application. Veterans and reservists are not 
eligible for these hunts.
Mobility-impaired Hunter (MI): An individual with permanent impairment(s) 
and/or disabilities that substantially limit their ability to walk and are certified 
by a doctor. For further information see page 20.
Muzzleloader (Muzzle): Sporting arm in which the charge and projectile(s) 
is loaded through the muzzle. Only blackpowder or equivalent blackpowder 
substitute may be used. Use of smokeless powder is prohibited. Only open 
or "iron" sights may be used on muzzleloader, bow or crossbow only hunts 
(sporting arm type 3). Scopes, red dots or other similar sights are not allowed.
NMDOW: New Mexico Department of Wildlife.
Nongame: Nongame species include prairie dogs, ground squirrels, Himalayan 
tahr, porcupine, rabbits, coyotes and skunks. See page 33.
Once-in-a-Lifetime License: A draw license that can be issued only once in 
an applicant’s lifetime. Hunters who have previously held a once-in-a-lifetime-
license may not apply again. 
Once-in-a-Youth License: A youth-only draw license that can be issued only 
once.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 162 ===
 162  
2026–2027
Over-the-Counter (OTC) License: A license available from vendors, NMDOW 
offices, online: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov and by telephone: 888-248-6866. 
Population Management Hunt: A hunt designed to manage the number of big 
game on public or private lands where animals have damaged property or may 
interfere with military operations.
Private-Land Authorization: Documentation obtained from a private landowner 
that allows a hunter to purchase a Private-Land Elk or Pronghorn License.
Private-Land Only Deer License: A license authorizing hunters to hunt deer 
only on private land with written permission. Hunters must enter a hunt code 
from a public-land hunt for the Game Management Unit (GMU) where the 
private land is located. Not available from license vendors for units 2A, 2B, 2C, 
4 and 5A.
Protected Species: Protected species for hunting purposes include all big game, 
turkey, squirrels and game birds. All protected species are defined in NMSA 
1978 Sections: 17–2–3, 17–5–2, 17–2–13, 17–2–14 and 17–2–4.2. All animals 
listed as endangered or threatened species or subspecies as stated in 19.33.6 
NMAC are also protected species.
Public land: For hunting purposes, this includes U.S Forest Service, BLM and 
state trust lands. Descriptions of federal and state public lands are listed on pages 
44-46. For trapping purposes, see page 132. 
Quality (Q) Hunt: These hunts are designed to increase opportunities for 
successful harvest, provide wider selections of mature deer or elk, and/or provide 
a pleasurable experience based on timing of the hunt and/or hunter density. 
Quality hunts are determined by the New Mexico State Wildlife Commission, 
and non-residents must pay a higher fee (page 17).
Ranch-wide Agreements (Pronghorn): Ranch-wide agreements allow private 
landowners to enroll their ranch’s private-deeded and public-leased acres as one 
contiguous ranch for access by public-draw hunters. Landowners are issued 
authorizations for pronghorn licenses valid on that property’s deeded and public-
leased acres. 
Restricted Muzzleloader (for specific deer hunts): Any muzzle-loading rifle 
using open sights, black powder or equivalent propellant and firing a full bore 
diameter bullet or patched round ball. The use of in-line ignition, scopes and 
smokeless powder are prohibited.
Senior Hunting Licenses: A reduced-fee license available for deer, elk, Game-
Hunting & Fishing Licenses available to New Mexico resident hunters 65 years 
of age and older. An off-range oryx draw hunt is available for seniors 70 and 
older (resident and non-resident) on the first day of the hunt.
Shotgun: Any centerfire shotgun or muzzle-loading shotgun not larger than 10 
gauge. 
Small game: Upland game and migratory game birds.
Glossary of Terms
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: 1-888-248-6866
=== page 163 ===
  163 
2026–2027
Snare: A wire or cable with a single closing device designed to capture a 
furbearer.
Spike Bull: Any antlered male elk with no second fork on any antler.
Standard (S) Hunt: Deer or elk hunts which are charged a regular license fee 
rather than a quality or high-demand fee.
State Trust Land: Lands administered by the Commissioner of Public Lands.
Trap: Any foothold trap, foot encapsulating trap, cage trap or body-grip trap set 
to capture a furbearer.
Upland Game: Quail, pheasant, grouse, squirrel and Eurasian collared dove. 
U.S. Military: Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, Coast Guard, or their 
Reserve Components, Army National Guard, Air National Guard, and 
commissioned members of the U.S. Public Health Service and the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Veteran (NM Resident): New Mexico resident veteran with a minimum of 90 
days active duty service in the U.S. Military, or six continuous years in the 
National Guard, Military Reserve Component, or commissioned officers of 
the U.S. Public Health or National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 
Veterans must have been honorably discharged from military service. NM 
resident veterans qualify for a 50% discount on all licenses, permits and stamps.
Waterfowl: Ducks and geese. 
Water set: Any trap or snare set fully in water.
Wildlife Management Area (WMA): Properties owned or managed by and under 
the control of the State Wildlife Commission as described in 19.34.5 NMAC.
Written Permission: A document (which may include a valid hunting, trapping 
or fishing license) that asserts the holder has permission from the private land 
owner or their designee to hunt, fish, trap or drive off road on the landowner’s 
property. 
Youth-Only Hunt: Hunts restricted to applicants 17 years of age or younger on 
opening day of the hunt.
Licenses, applications, harvest reporting and general information: wildlife.dgf.nm.gov
=== page 164 ===
 164  
2026–2027
New Mexico Department of Wildlife
Electronic Tag (E-Tag)
E-Tag option is available for all big game and 
turkey. Operational smartphone required. 
Validate your tag electronically with the NM E-Tag app. 
Works on supported Android or Apple smartphones even when off-line.
Be sure to delete and reinstall the NM E-Tag app  
at the beginning of each license year.
Information on pages 13–15.
