Nongame, Exotic, Endangered, Threatened & Protected Species — Texas Parks & Wildlife Department 
 Skip to Content 
 An official website of the Texas state government.
 Texas Parks and Wildlife 
 Menu 
 Search Texas Parks & Wildlife 
 Search 
 Home 
 Parks 
 Hunting 
 Fishing 
 Boating 
 Game Warden 
 Activities 
 Wildlife 
 Land & Water 
 Education 
 Media 
 Work & Volunteer 
 Events Calendar 
 Maps & Data 
 Donate 
 Accessibility 
 Contact Us 
 Español 
 Parks 
 Find a Park 
 Reservations 
 Park Passes 
 Maps & Publications 
 Park Events 
 Park FAQs 
 Park Rules 
 Hunting 
 Buy a Hunting License 
 Hunting Regulations 
 Public Hunting 
 Hunter Education 
 Seasons by County 
 Season Dates by Animal 
 Hunting Permits 
 Fishing 
 Buy a Fishing License 
 Fishing Regulations 
 Where to Fish 
 Fishing Reports 
 Fishing Programs 
 Fishing FAQs 
 Fishing Permits 
 Boating 
 Title, Registration & Tax 
 Online Tools and Forms 
 Office Locations 
 Boater Education 
 Boating Laws 
 Boating FAQs 
 Boating Permits 
 Game Warden 
 Field Notes 
 Career Opportunities 
 Law Enforcement Offices 
 Operation Game Thief 
 Activities 
 Camping & Lodging 
 Hiking & Nature Walks 
 Swimming 
 Boating & Paddling 
 All Activities 
 Wildlife 
 Wildlife Fact Sheets 
 Wildlife FAQs 
 Endangered Species 
 Game Management 
 Wildlife Management Areas for Conservation Research 
 Land & Water 
 Lake Finder 
 River Guide 
 Private Lands 
 Invasive Species 
 Landowner Assistance 
 Education 
 Classroom Resources 
 Hunter Education 
 Boater Education 
 Angler Education 
 Water Education 
 Media 
 News 
 TPW Magazine 
 Video 
 Social Media 
 Television Show 
 Work & Volunteer 
 Jobs & Careers 
 Volunteer Opportunities 
 Internships 
 Recruiting Events 
 Friends Groups 
 Events Calendar 
 Maps & Data 
 Sign Up for Email 
 Contact Us 
 Donate 
 Accessibility 
 Español 
 Outdoor Annual 
 〉
 Hunting 
 〉
 Nongame, Exotic, Endangered, Threatened & Protected Species 
 Nongame, Exotic, Endangered, Threatened & Protected Species
 Contents 
 Valid Sep. 1, 2026 through Aug. 31, 2027. 
 Skip to Section: 
 Nongame Species 
 Endangered, Threatened and Other Protected Animals 
 Non-Protected and/or Exotic Species 
 Nongame Collection Permits 
 Controlled Exotic Snake Permits 
 Nongame Species
 A hunting license is required for the take of nongame species. There are no closed seasons, bag limits or possession limits; and, they may be hunted at any time by any lawful means or methods on private property. There may be restrictions for certain species of nongame animals, including possession limits (see below). In addition, be aware that public hunting lands may also have additional restrictions. If hunting at night, as a courtesy please contact your local game warden. 
 Nongame Animals
 Includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
 Armadillos
 Bobcats
 Coyotes
 Flying squirrels
 Frogs
 Ground squirrels
 Mountain lions
 Porcupines
 Prairie dogs
 Rabbits and Hares
 Turtles (freshwater)
 Unlawful Activities for Take, Possession or Sale of Nongame Wildlife
 It is unlawful to:
 take any nongame species for commercial purposes (sale, offer for sale, barter, or exchange) from public lands or waters.
 possess armadillos for the purpose of sale.
 purchase, sell, trade, transport or ship out of state bobcat pelts without the appropriate pelt tag (CITES) attached. Pelt tags must be attached prior to being transported or shipped out of this state. Pelt tags may be obtained from any permitted bobcat pelt dealer, or any  TPWD Regional and Field Law Enforcement Office . For additional information contact TPWD at (800) 792-1112, menu 7, option 9 or (512) 389-4481.
 transport or sell live coyotes, as they are currently under a statewide rabies quarantine. For additional information, visit the DSHS website .
 possess a diamondback terrapin at any time.
 hunt (capture, trap, take, collect, or kill) any wild animal or wild bird on a public road or the right-of-way of public roads, except that a person may capture indigenous reptiles and amphibians (for recreational purposes only ) on the shoulder or unpaved right-of-way of a public roadway, provided the person possesses a valid Reptile and Amphibian Endorsement, the person employs non-lethal means only to capture the reptiles or amphibians, the person does not possess a trap, and the person is visibly wearing at least 144 square inches of reflective material, both front and back. No person may use artificial light from a motor vehicle to locate, capture, or attempt to capture a reptile or amphibian.
 collect from the wild, sell, offer for sale or exchange certain species of nongame wildlife (including rattlesnakes and other reptiles or amphibians) unless a proper nongame permit has been obtained from TPWD and all reporting and recordkeeping requirements are met.
 take or possess any freshwater turtles taken from the wild for commercial purposes.
 possess more than 6 individuals of any species of freshwater turtle from the wild.
 sell rattlesnakes at a roundup without a nongame permit/license to do so.
 Allow a live mountain lion to be captured in a trap for more than 36 hours.
 Allow a live mountain lion to be captured in a snare for more than 36 hours unless the snare is incapable of producing a loop greater than 10 inches.
 For more information on nongame regulations, permit requirements, and lists of lawful and prohibited species, contact TPWD at (800) 792-1112, menu 7 or (512) 389-4481, or visit Nongame Permits .
 Endangered, Threatened and Other Protected Animals
 In Texas, animal or plant species of conservation concern may be listed as threatened or endangered under the authority of state law and/or under the U.S. Endangered Species Act (ESA). It is unlawful for any person to hunt threatened or endangered nongame species. To sell or purchase goods made from threatened or endangered species, proper documentation must accompany the goods. See a list of threatened and endangered species in Texas .
 Protected Birds
 All indigenous birds (including, but not limited to, raptors and songbirds) are protected by various state and federal laws and may not be killed, taken from the nest, picked up, or possessed for any reason, and their feathers may not be possessed or sold (except for the unprotected birds listed in the Non-Protected and/or Exotic Species section). Arts and crafts may not include these protected species under any circumstances. A federal depredation permit may be issued to individuals who have evidence clearly showing certain protected wildlife is causing serious damage to commercial agricultural, horticultural, or aquacultural interests, or presents a threat to public safety. For more information, visit the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service website .
 Bats
 May not be hunted, killed, possessed, purchased or sold; however, bats may be moved, trapped, or killed if inside or on a building occupied by people. A person may transport a bat for the purpose of laboratory testing if there is a rabies or white-nosed syndrome (WNS) concern. Excluding bats from buildings is discouraged from May 1 – August 15 when young are unable to fly and may be entrapped. Please report suspected WNS cases to TPWD by email. 
 Black Bears
 Black bears are listed as a state-threatened species by TPWD. They are protected and cannot be hunted or killed. Please report black bear sightings or mortalities by calling (512) 389-4505. For more information, see bear safety on the TPWD website. 
 “Canned Hunts”
 No person may hunt a mountain lion that is in captivity, or release a mountain lion from captivity for the purpose of being hunted or training dogs. Furthermore, no person may conduct, promote, assist, or advertise an activity prohibited under these rules. No person may kill or attempt to injure a dangerous wild animal (African or Asiatic lion, tiger, leopard, cheetah, hyena, bear, elephant, wolf, or rhinoceros, or any subspecies or hybrid of these animals) that is held in captivity in this state or that is released from captivity in this state for the purpose of being killed, nor may any person conduct, promote, advertise, or assist in the hunting of a dangerous wild animal.
 Non-Protected and/or Exotic Species
 On private property, there are no required means and methods of take, state bag or possession limits, or closed seasons (hunting hours) on exotic animals, exotic fowl or other species not included in any of the previously addressed categories.
 Exotic Animals and Fowl
 An exotic animal is any animal that is not indigenous to Texas, including but not limited to aoudad sheep, axis deer, elk, sika deer, fallow deer, red deer, and blackbuck and nilgai antelope. An exotic fowl is any avian species that is not indigenous to Texas and is also not protected by the federal Migratory Bird Treaty Act, including but not limited to ratites (emu, ostrich, rhea, cassowary, etc.). Hunting License required.
 It is unlawful to:
 hunt an exotic without a valid hunting license (Class C misdemeanor);
 hunt an exotic on a public road or right-of-way. (Class A misdemeanor);
 hunt an exotic without the landowner's permission. (Class A misdemeanor); or
 possess an exotic or the carcass of an exotic without the owner's consent (Class A misdemeanor).
 Feral Hogs and Coyotes
 Hunter Education requirements apply.
 No hunting license is required to hunt feral hogs on private
property with landowner authorization.
 No hunting license is required to hunt depredating coyotes on private property with landowner authorization.
 Transportation and release of live feral hogs is unlawful, unless in compliance with Texas Animal Health Commission (TAHC) regulations. The TAHC regulates the movement of feral swine for disease-control purposes. For more information please call TAHC at (800) 550-8242 or visit the Texas Animal Health Commission website .
 Mountains Lions
 Mountain lions are classified as nongame animals; they are not protected and can be harvested at any time. Please report mountain lion sightings, harvests or mortalities to (512) 389-4505. Look for new mountain lion reporting features to be available soon in the Texas Hunt & Fish app .
 Unprotected Birds
 Birds not protected by any state or federal law include European starlings, English sparrows (house sparrow), feral rock doves (common pigeon), Egyptian geese, Muscovy ducks (except in Hidalgo, Starr, Zapata counties) and Eurasian collared-doves; these species may be killed at any time, their nests or eggs destroyed, and their feathers possessed. Hunting license required.
 Nongame Collection Permits
 Permit for dealer to collect nongame wildlife. More information about nongame permits is available.
 Nongame Collection Permits 
 Permit | 
 Eligibility | 
 Item | 
 Fee | 
 Availability | 
 Resident Nongame Collection Permit | 
 Texas resident | 
 548 | 
 $19 | 
 Buy online | 
 Non-resident Nongame Collection Permit | 
 Non-resident | 
 550 | 
 $63 | 
 Buy online | 
 Controlled Exotic Snake Permits
 Required for the possession, purchase, sale, or transportation of certain snakes. Also known as the non-indigenous snake permit. More information about the controlled exotic snake permit is available.
 Controlled Exotic Snake Permits 
 Permit | 
 Eligibility | 
 Item | 
 Fee | 
 Availability | 
 Recreational Controlled Exotic Snake Permit | 
 Texas resident and non-resident | 
 580 | 
 $20 | 
 Buy online | 
 Commercial Controlled Exotic Snake Permit | 
 Texas resident and non-resident | 
 581 | 
 $60 | 
 Buy online | 
 Back to Top
 ∧ Back to Top 
 Contact Us 
 (512) 389-4800 or (800) 792-1112
 About
 General Information 
 Office Locations 
 Compact with Texans 
 Jobs & Careers 
 Publications 
 Volunteer Opportunities 
 General Policies 
 General FAQs 
 Doing Business
 Agency Forms 
 Permits 
 Grants & Assistance 
 Bids & Vendor Opportunities 
 Surplus Property 
 Contract Reports 
 TPW Commission
 Commission Members 
 Commission Meetings 
 Advisory Committees 
 Public Comment 
 Website Policies
 Privacy & Security 
 Accessibility Policy 
 Linking Policy 
 Copyright Policy 
 Disclaimer 
 All Site Policies 
 Intranet 
 Statewide Information
 Texas.gov 
 Homeland Security 
 TRAIL Archives 
 Texas Transparency 
 Texas Tourism 
 Texas Veterans Portal 
 Connect
 Social Media 
 Questions & Comments 
 Open Records 
 Compliments and Complaints 
 Report Fraud 
 Texas Parks and Wildlife 
 4200 Smith School Rd.
 Austin, TX 78744
 (512) 389-4800
 (800) 792-1112
 TPW Foundation Official
Non-Profit Partner
 Report crimes
against wildlife 
 TPWD complies with Federal civil rights laws and is committed to providing its programs and services without discrimination. See the TPWD Nondiscrimination Policy .
 Content of this site © Copyright Texas Parks and Wildlife Department unless otherwise noted.